# ***Gulliver's Travels***: A Global Voyage Through Satire, Culture, and Time

**Original Title:** *Travels into Several Remote Nations of the World.
In Four Parts. By Lemuel Gulliver, First a Surgeon, and then a Captain
of Several Ships* <sup>1</sup>

Original Language: English

Publication Date: October 28, 1726 2

Original Publisher: Benjamin Motte, London 2

## Part I: The World of Gulliver and Swift

### Why Should I Care? Your Guide to a 300-Year-Old Masterpiece

Before you dismiss *Gulliver's Travels* as a dusty classic or a simple
children's fantasy, consider this: Jonathan Swift's 1726 masterpiece is
one of the most savage, funny, and surprisingly modern critiques of
society ever written.<sup>3</sup> It’s not just a story about a man who
meets tiny people and giants; it’s a funhouse mirror held up to our own
world, and the reflection isn't always pretty.<sup>3</sup>

Think about the absurd political divisions you see online, where people
go to war over trivial issues. That’s the entire first voyage to
Lilliput, where two great empires fight a devastating war over which end
of an egg to crack.<sup>5</sup> Have you ever felt that the smartest
people in the room are often the most clueless about real life? That’s
the third voyage to the floating island of Laputa, a place filled with
brilliant academics so lost in abstract theories—like trying to extract
sunbeams from cucumbers—that their society is literally falling apart
beneath them.<sup>6</sup>

At its heart, *Gulliver's Travels* is about alienation and the struggle
to find one's place in a world that often seems insane.<sup>8</sup> The
main character, Lemuel Gulliver, is the ultimate outsider, constantly
trying to understand and fit into societies that operate on bizarre
logic. His journey is a timeless exploration of identity, morality, and
the maddening gap between how we see ourselves and how the world sees
us.<sup>9</sup> Swift wrote the book "to vex the world rather than
divert it," and nearly 300 years later, its power to make us question
our own "normal" remains as sharp as ever.<sup>11</sup>

### Fascinating Facts & The Secret History of ***Gulliver's Travels***

#### Swift's Identity and Motivations

The man behind the curtain was Jonathan Swift (1667-1745), a figure as
complex as his most famous work.<sup>3</sup> Born in Dublin, Swift was
an Anglo-Irish satirist, poet, political pamphleteer, and cleric who
rose to become the Dean of St. Patrick's Cathedral in his birth
city.<sup>3</sup> This "Anglo-Irish" identity was central to his
worldview. He never felt entirely at home in either England, the seat of
colonial power, or Ireland, the country he often defended against
English economic exploitation.<sup>14</sup> This feeling of being an
outsider gave him what one scholar calls a "homelessness of mind,"
allowing him to view cultures with a cold, anthropological detachment
that became the engine of his satire.<sup>14</sup>

Swift was no stranger to the corridors of power. He worked as a
political writer for both of England's major parties, first the Whigs
and later the Tories.<sup>3</sup> This firsthand experience with
political backstabbing, corruption, and the absurdity of partisan
loyalty provided the raw material for his satirical attacks. The bitter
feud between the "High-Heels" and "Low-Heels" in Lilliput is a direct
parody of the Tory and Whig parties of his day.<sup>16</sup> His
writings on Ireland, like the Drapier's Letters and the famously savage

*A Modest Proposal*, show a deep anger at the injustices of English
colonial policy, a theme that echoes throughout Gulliver's
travels.<sup>14</sup>

#### The Clandestine Creation and Publication

Given its sharp political attacks, publishing *Gulliver's Travels* was a
dangerous act.<sup>18</sup> Swift operated in an era of state
censorship, where libel and treason laws were used to suppress
dissent.<sup>18</sup> To protect himself, he went to extraordinary
lengths. The book was published anonymously in October 1726, presented
as the genuine travel memoir of one "Lemuel Gulliver, first a Surgeon,
and then a Captain of many ships".<sup>2</sup> To further cover his
tracks, Swift had the manuscript copied by another person to ensure his
own handwriting could not be used as evidence in a potential
prosecution.<sup>11</sup>

The manuscript was delivered secretly at night to the London publisher
Benjamin Motte, who was given strict instructions and a tight
deadline.<sup>19</sup> Denied access to the final proofs, Swift was
horrified to discover that Motte, fearing legal repercussions, had
censored parts of the original text without his permission.<sup>2</sup>
It was not until 1735 that a more complete and authoritative version,
approved by Swift and containing more "conspicuous allegory," was
published in Dublin by George Faulkner.<sup>1</sup> It is this 1735
Faulkner edition that serves as the basis for most modern versions of
the book we read today.<sup>2</sup> The book's very journey into print
is a story of political intrigue and authorial struggle, mirroring the
conflicts within its pages.

#### Fact-Checking the Legend

Myth: Gulliver's Travels is a children's story.

Fact: This is perhaps the most persistent myth about the book. From the
moment of its publication, its fantastical elements made it a smash hit
in the nursery.2 Publishers quickly capitalized on this, releasing
heavily abridged and sanitized versions for children that focused only
on the voyages to Lilliput and Brobdingnag.21 However, Swift's original
intent was far from child's play. He wrote the book for adults as a
sophisticated and often brutal satire on human nature, society, and
politics.3 As he famously claimed, he wrote it "to vex the world rather
than divert it".11

Myth: Gulliver is just a stand-in for Jonathan Swift.

Fact: While Gulliver's experiences and observations often reflect
Swift's own views and critiques, he is a carefully constructed fictional
character, not a simple authorial mouthpiece.22 To equate Gulliver's
final, maddened misanthropy—where he shuns human contact in favor of his
horses—with Swift's own philosophy is a critical error.23 At the end of
the novel, Gulliver is not an enlightened sage but a tragic and absurd
figure, a man whose mind has been broken by his inability to reconcile
the ideal with the real. The satire is directed as much

*at* Gulliver's final, simplistic rejection of humanity as it is at the
societies he visits.<sup>9</sup>

## Part II: De-Coding the Satire: A Journey Through Four Worlds

### Lilliput: The Politics of Pettiness (Part I)

The first voyage lands Gulliver in Lilliput, a land of people merely six
inches tall, and it serves as a powerful allegory for the absurdities of
European politics and human pride.<sup>24</sup> The Lilliputians,
despite their minuscule size, possess an inflated sense of their own
importance, a direct satirical jab at humanity's tendency toward
excessive vanity.<sup>25</sup>

The political landscape of Lilliput is a direct parody of early
18th-century England.<sup>16</sup> The bitter rivalry between the

*Tramecksan* party, who wear high-heeled shoes, and the *Slamecksan*
party, who wear low heels, mirrors the pointless factionalism between
the English Tory and Whig parties.<sup>5</sup> The method for gaining
political office is not based on merit but on skill in rope-dancing, a
clear critique of the corrupt court politics under figures like Prime
Minister Sir Robert Walpole.<sup>16</sup>

The most famous satire in this section is the war between Lilliput
(representing England) and the neighboring empire of Blefuscu
(representing France).<sup>26</sup> The cause of this long and bloody
conflict is a disagreement over doctrine: which end of an egg should be
broken. The "Big-Endians" of Blefuscu follow the traditional method,
while the Lilliputians, by royal decree, are
"Little-Endians".<sup>5</sup> This trivial dispute stands as a scathing
allegory for the centuries of violent religious wars between Catholic
France and Protestant England, exposing them as fundamentally irrational
and based on insignificant differences in dogma.<sup>27</sup>

For a Polish reader, this allegory of two powerful, feuding empires
would carry a unique historical weight. While an English reader might
see a specific critique of the conflict with France, a Polish reader
could interpret it through the long and painful history of Poland's
position between larger, aggressive powers like Russia, Prussia, and
Austria. The story of a nation's sovereignty being threatened by the
arbitrary whims and pointless conflicts of its neighbors is a theme
deeply ingrained in Polish history, particularly in the context of the
18th-century partitions. The satire thus transcends its specific English
context and becomes a universal commentary on the precariousness of
national survival in a world of imperial ambitions.

### Brobdingnag: The Unflattering Mirror (Part II)

In the second voyage, the tables are turned. Gulliver finds himself in
Brobdingnag, a land of giants where he is now the tiny
creature.<sup>6</sup> This reversal of scale forces a radical shift in
perspective, transforming Gulliver from a figure of immense power to a
helpless pet and curiosity.<sup>29</sup> The world of the
Brobdingnagians functions as a giant magnifying glass, exposing the
physical and moral flaws of humanity in grotesque detail.<sup>27</sup>

Swift uses this voyage to satirize the Enlightenment's tendency to
overlook the messy, physical reality of human existence.<sup>25</sup>
Gulliver is repulsed by the magnified sight of the giants' skin, with
its pores "as large as a Mole-hill," and is nearly sickened by the smell
of their bodies.<sup>30</sup> This focus on the "common filth of life"
is a deliberate slap in the face to philosophical ideals that present
humans as wholly spiritual or transcendent beings.<sup>29</sup>

The moral core of this section is Gulliver's conversations with the King
of Brobdingnag. When Gulliver proudly describes European
civilization—its laws, its wars, its political systems—the King is not
impressed. He is horrified. After listening to Gulliver's account of
European history, the King delivers one of the most damning lines in the
book, concluding that Gulliver's people are "the most pernicious Race of
little odious Vermin that Nature ever suffered to crawl upon the Surface
of the Earth".<sup>31</sup> This judgment strips away all European
pretensions to moral superiority.

This voyage functions as a powerful critique of the colonial mindset. In
Lilliput, Gulliver, the European explorer, enjoyed the power and
privilege of the colonizer. In Brobdingnag, he is forced to experience
the world from the perspective of the colonized "other"—he is captured,
displayed for money, and treated as a plaything.<sup>33</sup> The King's
final verdict is, in essence, the voice of the colonized world judging
the colonizer, using the very logic of physical superiority that
underpins imperialism against its representative.

### Laputa and its Neighbors: The Perils of Abstract Thought (Part III)

Gulliver's third voyage takes him to a series of bizarre lands that
serve as Swift's most direct satire on the excesses of the scientific
revolution and Enlightenment intellectualism.<sup>25</sup> The journey
begins on Laputa, a flying island inhabited by an aristocracy so
consumed by abstract thought—mathematics and music—that they are
completely detached from the world below.<sup>6</sup> They are so lost
in their own minds that they require servants called "flappers" to
gently hit them with inflated bladders to remind them to listen or
speak.<sup>6</sup> Their wives, starved of attention, regularly seek
lovers on the continent of Balnibarbi below.<sup>12</sup>

Balnibarbi itself is in a state of ruin because its landowners have
abandoned traditional, practical methods of agriculture in favor of the
wild, theoretical schemes promoted by the "projectors" at the Grand
Academy of Lagado.<sup>12</sup> This academy is a direct parody of the
Royal Society of London.<sup>11</sup> Here, Gulliver witnesses
scientists engaged in absurd and useless experiments: trying to extract
sunbeams from cucumbers, attempting to turn human excrement back into
food, and building houses from the roof down.<sup>7</sup>

The voyage takes a darker turn in Luggnagg, where Gulliver encounters
the *struldbrugs*, a race of wretched immortals.<sup>6</sup> They are
not blessed with eternal youth but are doomed to suffer the endless
decay of old age, becoming senile, physically decrepit, and despised by
all. By the age of eighty, they are declared legally dead.<sup>6</sup>
This grim depiction serves as a powerful critique of the human desire to
overcome natural limits through science, suggesting that some things are
worse than death.

This entire voyage functions as Swift's warning against a particular
kind of "reason" that is divorced from practicality, wisdom, and human
feeling. He argues that a society that worships abstract theory over
common sense will not achieve utopia but will instead decay into a
crumbling wasteland, ruled by a disconnected and oppressive elite.

### The Land of the Houyhnhnms: The Ultimate Question (Part IV)

The fourth and final voyage is the most philosophically intense and
controversial part of the novel.<sup>37</sup> Gulliver arrives in a land
governed by the

**Houyhnhnms**, a race of highly intelligent, perfectly rational horses
who live by the principles of truth and nature.<sup>6</sup> Their
society is a stoic utopia: calm, orderly, and devoid of greed, lust, or
violence. They have no word for "lie," instead calling it "the thing
which is not".<sup>32</sup>

Coexisting with them are the **Yahoos**, savage, filthy, and depraved
creatures who are physically identical to humans.<sup>17</sup> They
represent humanity stripped of reason, driven only by base
appetites.<sup>38</sup> Gulliver is initially repulsed by the Yahoos but
is forced to confront his own physical similarity to them. He comes to
despise his own species and idolize the Houyhnhnms, seeing them as the
perfection of nature.<sup>17</sup>

The climax of Gulliver's psychological journey occurs when the
Houyhnhnms, in a council, decide that he cannot stay with them. Despite
his rational mind, his Yahoo body makes him a threat to their perfect
society.<sup>17</sup> This banishment shatters Gulliver's mind. After
being rescued by the kind Portuguese captain, Don Pedro, whom he can
only see as a filthy Yahoo, Gulliver returns to England a broken
man.<sup>40</sup> He cannot bear the presence of his own family and
spends his days in the stable, conversing with his horses, whom he finds
to be far superior company.<sup>17</sup>

For centuries, critics have debated Swift's intention here. The "hard"
reading suggests Swift shares Gulliver's final conclusion: humanity is
nothing more than a despicable race of Yahoos, and the rational
Houyhnhnms are the ideal.<sup>22</sup> However, a more nuanced "soft"
reading, now widely accepted, argues that Swift is satirizing

*both* extremes.<sup>22</sup> The Yahoos represent passion without
reason, but the Houyhnhnms represent reason without passion. Their
society, while peaceful, is also cold, emotionless, and lacking in
individuality and love.<sup>25</sup> Gulliver's ultimate madness stems
from his inability to accept the complex, messy truth of human nature:
that we are creatures of both reason and passion, neither pure animal
nor pure intellect. His swing from blind pride to absolute misanthropy
is his final, and greatest, folly.

## Part III: Gulliver Goes Global: Translation and Cultural Reception

### Lost in Translation: The Challenge of Exporting Satire

The instant success of *Gulliver's Travels* in London ensured its rapid
journey across the English Channel and beyond.<sup>2</sup> However, as
the book crossed linguistic and cultural borders, Swift's sharp, topical
satire was often blunted, reshaped, or completely repurposed to fit the
tastes and ideologies of its new audiences.

The primary gateway for the book's entry into Europe was France. The
first French translation appeared in January 1727, but it was the
second, by Abbé Pierre-François Guyot Desfontaines, that became the most
influential.<sup>23</sup> This version was a classic example of a

*belle infidèle* ("beautiful unfaithful") translation. Desfontaines,
aiming to please the refined "bon goût" (good taste) of the French
court, systematically removed what he considered "crude jokes,"
"impenetrable allegories," and offensive scatological details, while
adding his own moralizing passages.<sup>23</sup> Crucially, this adapted
French text, not Swift's original English, served as the source for the
first translations into many other European languages, including Polish,
German, Russian, and Spanish.<sup>41</sup>

This process of cultural filtering continued across the continent. In
Germany, early criticism was heavily influenced by biographical attacks
on Swift, leading readers to interpret the book's satire as a symptom of
the author's personal misanthropy rather than a critique of
society.<sup>23</sup> In the 20th century, Soviet Russia produced one of
the most radical reinterpretations: the 1935 animated film

*The New Gulliver*, which transformed Swift's story into a piece of
communist propaganda. In this version, Gulliver inspires the oppressed
proletarian workers of Lilliput to overthrow their greedy capitalist
king.<sup>42</sup>

Further east, the book underwent even more dramatic transformations. In
China, where it was first introduced in 1872, it was initially read as a
work of science fiction.<sup>43</sup> Over the decades, its complex
satirical layers were stripped away, and it was embraced primarily as a
children's adventure story. Today, it is a required reading in the
Chinese national curriculum, but almost exclusively in its capacity as a
fantasy tale for young people, with countless illustrated and simplified
editions in circulation.<sup>43</sup>

Japan holds a unique place in the book's global reception. It is the
only real country that Gulliver visits, and Swift portrays the Japanese
as a reasonable people, a stark contrast to the prevailing European
distrust of Asian nations at the time.<sup>44</sup> This has made the
book a subject of special interest in Japan, leading to unique cultural
phenomena like the Gulliver-Kannonzaki Festival in Yokosuka City, where
American sailors from the local naval base participate in a parade
dressed as Gulliver.<sup>45</sup>

The global journey of *Gulliver's Travels* demonstrates that a literary
work is not a fixed object but a living text that is constantly
reinterpreted. Each culture that encountered the book reshaped it in its
own image, revealing its own values, political anxieties, and literary
tastes in the process.

### Table: Key International Translations of ***Gulliver's Travels***

The following table provides a snapshot of the book's initial journey
into several key languages, highlighting the crucial role of translation
in shaping its international legacy.

| Language | First Translation Year | First Translator(s) | Original Title of Translation | Notable Characteristics / Source Text |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| **French** | 1727 | Abbé Pierre-François Guyot Desfontaines | *Voyages de Gulliver* | Heavily adapted and censored to suit French "bon goût"; became the source text for many other European translations.<sup>23</sup> |
| **Polish** | 1784 | Anonymous | *Podróże kapitana Guliwera w Różne Kraje Dalekie* | Translated from the French version, not the original English. Printed in Supraśl.<sup>46</sup> |
| **German** | 1727 | (Anonymous) | *Des Capitains Lemuel Gulliver Reisen in unterschiedliche entfernte und unbekandte Länder* | Based on a more faithful French version, but reception was heavily shaped by biographical criticism of Swift.<sup>23</sup> |
| **Russian** | 1772 | Erofey Karzhavin (presumed) | *Путешествия Гулливеровы* | Likely based on the French translation. Later heavily reinterpreted through a Marxist lens, culminating in the 1935 film *The New Gulliver*.<sup>41</sup> |
| **Spanish** | 1793-1800 | Ramón Máximo Spartal | *Los viajes de Gulliver* | First full translation appeared around 1800, also likely derived from the French.<sup>41</sup> |
| **Chinese** | 1872 | (Anonymous) | *Tan Ying Xiao Lu* (谈瀛小录) | First introduced as an incomplete serialization. Later versions transformed the work into children's literature, downplaying the satire.<sup>43</sup> |
| **Japanese** | 1883 | Nagamine Hideki | *Garibā Ryokōki* (ガリバー旅行記) | Japan is the only real country featured, creating a unique reception history and even local festivals.<sup>44</sup> |
| **Italian** | 1729 | (Anonymous) | *Viaggi del capitano Lemuel Gulliver in diversi paesi lontani* | Also based on the French translation by Desfontaines.<sup>41</sup> |

## Part IV: The Polish Gulliver: A Deep Dive into a Nation's Reading

### A History of ***Podróże Guliwera***

*Gulliver's Travels* arrived in Poland relatively early, but its journey
was indirect. The first Polish translation, titled *Podróże kapitana
Guliwera w Różne Kraje Dalekie*, was published in 1784 and printed in
the town of Supraśl.<sup>47</sup> Critically, this was not a translation
from Swift's original English text. Following the common practice of the
era, it was a translation of Abbé Desfontaines's heavily adapted French
version.<sup>49</sup> This means that for over a century, Polish readers
experienced a Gulliver whose satirical edges had been smoothed over to
fit the sensibilities of the French salon. A more faithful translation
from the original English did not appear until 1842, published in
Leipzig.<sup>49</sup>

In the 20th century, the book was re-translated by some of Poland's most
significant literary figures, cementing its place in the Polish
canon.<sup>46</sup> These versions often carried different titles,
reflecting their varied approaches:

- **Cecylia Niewiadomska (1929):** Her translation, *Podróże Gulliwera*,
  was influential in popularizing the story, particularly among younger
  readers.<sup>46</sup>

- **Jan Kott:** A towering figure in Polish literary criticism, Kott
  produced a version titled *Podróże Guliwera w różne kraje dalekie*,
  which was a scholarly revision of the original 1784 anonymous
  translation.<sup>46</sup> His involvement underscores the book's
  importance as a serious work of literature, not just a children's
  story.

- **Maciej Słomczyński:** Known for his masterful translations of
  English classics like Shakespeare and Joyce, Słomczyński's version,
  *Podróże do wielu odległych narodów świata*, is highly regarded for
  its attempt to capture the full scope and title of Swift's unabridged
  work.<sup>46</sup>

- **Jacek Bocheński and Marian Brandys (1981):** This collaborative
  translation was published during a period of intense political turmoil
  in Poland, just before the imposition of martial law. Its appearance
  at such a time suggests a renewed interest in the book's potent
  political satire and its critique of authoritarian power.<sup>48</sup>

### Gulliver in the Polish Classroom

*Gulliver's Travels* has been a fixture in the Polish educational system
for generations, though its status has varied.<sup>57</sup> As early as
the 18th century, it was recognized alongside

*Robinson Crusoe* as a foundational text of the European novel that was
quickly adopted by young readers.<sup>50</sup>

In modern times, it has occupied a dual role in the official curriculum
(*podstawa programowa*). In a 2016 curriculum list, an edition "for
children" (*wydanie dla dzieci*) was included as a *lektura
uzupełniająca* (supplementary reading) for Grade 4 of primary
school.<sup>59</sup> This placement emphasizes its role as an adventure
story that introduces young students to classic world literature.

Simultaneously, fragments of the novel are included in the high school
curriculum for the Enlightenment period, placing Swift alongside Polish
Enlightenment figures like Ignacy Krasicki.<sup>60</sup> This dual
placement is significant. For younger students, it is a fantastical
voyage. For older students, it becomes a key text for analyzing the
complex literary and philosophical currents of its era, including
satire, allegory, and social critique. This layered approach has ensured
its enduring presence in Polish education, allowing the book to grow
with the reader. While it is a part of the curriculum, specific data on
its frequency in the final national high school exam (

*matura*) is not readily available.<sup>62</sup>

### The Polish Critical Eye: From Krasicki to Miłosz and Lem

Swift's influence extends far beyond the classroom, deeply shaping the
work of some of Poland's most important writers. They saw in *Gulliver's
Travels* not just a foreign classic, but a powerful model for using
fantasy and satire to critique their own often-turbulent reality.

- **Ignacy Krasicki (1735-1801):** As the leading poet and novelist of
  the Polish Enlightenment, Krasicki was a kindred spirit to
  Swift.<sup>64</sup> His 1776 novel,  
  *Mikołaja Doświadczyńskiego przypadki* (*The Adventures of Nicholas
  Wisdom*), is considered the first modern Polish novel and bears a
  striking resemblance to Swift's work. It employs a similar travel
  narrative structure to satirize society, and its utopian island of
  Nipu functions much like Swift's idealized lands, serving as a foil to
  the corruption of Europe.<sup>66</sup> Krasicki explicitly references
  Swift in the novel's opening, acknowledging his debt to the master
  satirist.<sup>66</sup>

- **Czesław Miłosz (1911-2004):** The Nobel Prize-winning poet conducted
  a profound and personal dialogue with Swift throughout his career. In
  his 1947 poem, "Do Jonathana Swifta" ("To Jonathan Swift"), written in
  the aftermath of World War II, Miłosz directly invokes Gulliver's
  voyages to diagnose the moral state of modern Europe. He writes, "I
  also met the Yahoo tribe, / Living in their slavish fear, / A cursed
  brood of informers / Who adore their excrement".<sup>68</sup> For
  Miłosz, the Yahoos were not just a literary device but a chillingly
  accurate metaphor for the degradation of humanity he had witnessed.
  Yet, he did not see Swift as a simple misanthrope, but as a man whose
  "thorough anger" was a form of moral perseverance.<sup>68</sup>

- **Stanisław Lem (1921-2006):** The globally acclaimed science fiction
  author brilliantly adapted the Swiftian model for the 20th century.
  His recurring protagonist, Ijon Tichy of *Dzienniki gwiazdowe* (*The
  Star Diaries*), has been called a "cosmic Gulliver".<sup>70</sup>
  Tichy's journeys to bizarre planets with absurd political systems,
  nonsensical philosophies, and self-defeating technologies are a direct
  continuation of the tradition established by  
  *Gulliver's Travels*.<sup>70</sup> Lem, writing from behind the Iron
  Curtain, used these fantastical voyages to satirize the dogmas of
  totalitarianism, the follies of scientific hubris, and the inherent
  flaws of human nature, much as Swift had done two centuries
  earlier.<sup>72</sup>

For these canonical Polish authors, Swift provided an essential literary
toolkit. The "Gulliver" model—displacing social critique into a
fantastical realm—offered a way to gain the necessary critical distance
to analyze their own complex and often dangerous realities.

### Gulliver on the Polish Stage and Street

The cultural footprint of *Gulliver's Travels* in Poland is most visibly
embodied by the **Teatr Lalek Guliwer** (Gulliver Puppet Theatre) in
Warsaw.<sup>75</sup> Founded in October 1945, in the ruins of the
war-torn city, this institution is one of Poland's oldest and most
respected theaters for children.<sup>75</sup> It officially adopted the
name "Gulliver" in December 1947, following a successful premiere of the
play

*Guliwer w krainie liliputów* (*Gulliver in the Land of the
Lilliputians*).<sup>76</sup> For over 75 years, the theatre has
introduced generations of Polish children to the story, cementing its
place in the nation's cultural consciousness.<sup>75</sup>

The novel continues to inspire new theatrical productions across Poland,
often blending its adventurous elements with its deeper satirical
themes. A recent production at the Těšínské Theatre, which has a
Polish-language stage, used a mix of puppets and masks to create a
performance that was engaging for children while still exploring adult
themes of social depravity and the intolerance of
"otherness".<sup>78</sup> Another adaptation,

*Morskie opowieści kapitana Guliwera* (*The Sea Tales of Captain
Gulliver*), uses music and choreography to make the story accessible to
even the youngest audiences.<sup>79</sup> Beyond the stage, the name
"Gulliver" has entered the popular lexicon, used for everything from a
travel agency in Legionowo to a general metaphor for travel and
adventure.<sup>80</sup>

## Part V: Gulliver Remixed: From the Silver Screen to Social Media

### Adapting the Unadaptable: Gulliver in Film and TV

From its earliest days, cinema has been drawn to the spectacular imagery
of *Gulliver's Travels*, but has consistently struggled with its savage
satirical core.<sup>81</sup> The history of the book's adaptations is
largely a story of prioritizing visual fantasy over philosophical
critique, a trend that began with the first film, a 1902 French silent
short by Georges Méliès.<sup>81</sup>

- ***Gulliver's Travels* (1939, Fleischer Studios):** As the second
  full-length animated feature in American history (after Disney's *Snow
  White*), this film set the template for most future adaptations. It
  focuses exclusively on the voyage to Lilliput, transforming Swift's
  dark political allegory into a bright, musical children's
  fantasy.<sup>81</sup> The deep-seated conflict between Lilliput and
  Blefuscu is reduced to a silly argument over which kingdom's national
  song should be played at a royal wedding.<sup>81</sup> The film is now
  understood not as an adaptation of Swift's novel, but of the
  simplified, illustrated children's chapbooks that had become popular
  since the 18th century.<sup>81</sup>

- ***The New Gulliver* (1935, Soviet Union):** This groundbreaking
  stop-motion animation is one of the most radical reinterpretations of
  the story. It recasts Gulliver as a young Soviet pioneer who dreams he
  lands in Lilliput, a nation suffering under capitalist oppression. He
  then inspires the Lilliputian proletariat to rise up and overthrow
  their decadent king and his cronies.<sup>42</sup> The film completely
  co-opts Swift's narrative framework for communist propaganda,
  demonstrating the story's incredible ideological flexibility.

- ***Gulliver's Travels* (1996, TV Miniseries):** This ambitious
  production, starring Ted Danson, is the only major screen adaptation
  to date that includes all four of Gulliver's voyages.<sup>81</sup> It
  introduces a compelling framing device: Gulliver returns to England
  after his travels and is committed to an insane asylum, recounting his
  adventures in flashbacks to prove his sanity.<sup>83</sup> While
  praised for its faithfulness to the novel's scope and its impressive
  special effects, the miniseries ultimately pulls its punches. It gives
  Gulliver a happy ending, allowing him to be vindicated and reunited
  with his family, thereby softening the original's devastating
  conclusion of misanthropic madness.<sup>81</sup>

- ***Gulliver's Travels* (2010):** Starring Jack Black, this modern
  comedy adaptation relies on crude humor and pop-culture gags, almost
  entirely abandoning the source material's satirical
  intent.<sup>85</sup> Memorable scenes include Gulliver getting a
  Lilliputian stuck in his buttock cleavage and recreating scenes from  
  *Star Wars* and *Titanic* for the Lilliputians.<sup>85</sup> It
  represents the final stage in the process of stripping the story of
  its intellectual content, leaving only the high-concept premise.

The cinematic history of *Gulliver's Travels* reveals a central paradox:
the book's imagery is perfectly suited for the visual medium of film,
but its core message—a pessimistic and biting critique of humanity—is
considered too challenging for mainstream commercial entertainment.

### Gulliver for Gen Z: TikTok, Memes, and Fan Culture

In the digital age, *Gulliver's Travels* continues to be reinterpreted,
though its presence is more fragmented. On **YouTube**, the book thrives
as educational content. Video essays and animated summaries from
channels like Course Hero break down the novel's complex themes,
characters, and historical context for students cramming for an exam or
seeking a quick understanding of the classic.<sup>87</sup> These videos
serve as modern-day study guides, translating Swift's 18th-century prose
for a digital-native audience.

On more ephemeral platforms like **TikTok** and **Instagram**, the
book's presence is less about deep analysis and more about iconic,
visceral moments. The scene of Gulliver extinguishing the palace fire
with his urine is a recurring point of reference in comments, valued for
its shock and humor.<sup>88</sup> Film clips, particularly from the more
comedic adaptations, circulate, but sustained trends or memes directly
from the text are rare.<sup>89</sup>

The world of **fanfiction and fan art** offers a more creative
engagement. While the *Gulliver's Travels* fandom is small compared to
modern franchises, communities on sites like Archive of Our Own (AO3)
and DeviantArt explore the text in new ways.<sup>90</sup> Fan works
often involve crossovers, placing Gulliver in conversation with other
literary figures like Long John Silver or the miniature characters from

*Night at the Museum*.<sup>90</sup> Some writers explore underdeveloped
relationships, such as a potential romance between the broken Gulliver
and the kind Captain Don Pedro who rescues him.<sup>90</sup>

Interestingly, this fan activity has a long and distinguished history.
*Gulliver's Travels* inspired some of the very first works of modern
fanfiction. Shortly after its publication, Swift's friend, the poet
Alexander Pope, wrote a series of poems from the perspective of
Gulliver's neglected wife, Mary.<sup>92</sup> Around the same time, the
famous engraver William Hogarth created what can only be described as
fan art: a satirical print depicting Gulliver receiving an enema from a
team of Lilliputians.<sup>93</sup> These 18th-century "remixes" show
that the impulse to play in, expand, and critique a beloved fictional
world is as old as the novel itself.

## Part VI: Why Gulliver Still Matters: Contemporary Connections

### "I Saw Myself in This Character": Identity and Representation

Nearly 300 years after its publication, *Gulliver's Travels* continues
to generate new meanings as readers approach it through the lens of
contemporary identity politics. Modern critical theories have unlocked
fresh and often challenging interpretations of Swift's work.

- **Postcolonial Readings:** The novel is now seen as a foundational
  text for postcolonial criticism. It masterfully satirizes the logic of
  European colonialism by manipulating the power dynamics between the
  explorer and the "native".<sup>94</sup> In Lilliput, Gulliver embodies
  the overwhelming physical power of the colonizer, yet he is ensnared
  by the Lilliputians' political machinations.<sup>34</sup> In
  Brobdingnag, he is reduced to the status of the colonized "other"—a
  specimen to be studied and displayed.<sup>33</sup> The book's most
  direct anti-colonial statement comes in Part IV, where Gulliver
  describes the brutal process by which European nations claim colonies:
  arriving in a new land, murdering the local population, and claiming
  it for their king in a "pious expedition".<sup>96</sup>

- **Gender and Sexuality:** Feminist analysis of the novel reveals a
  complex and often contradictory attitude toward women. On one hand,
  the text is filled with misogynistic tropes of the 18th
  century.<sup>98</sup> Female bodies are frequently depicted as
  grotesque or objects of disgust, particularly in Brobdingnag, and
  female sexuality is often linked to moral corruption, as with the
  adulterous wives of Laputa.<sup>19</sup> On the other hand, Swift puts
  forth a surprisingly progressive argument for the equal education of
  women, a policy practiced in both the flawed society of Lilliput and
  the idealized society of the Houyhnhnms.<sup>26</sup> Some queer
  theorists have also explored the novel's subtext, interpreting
  Gulliver's final rejection of his wife and his profound emotional
  connection to the male society of horses as a critique of compulsory
  heteronormativity.<sup>101</sup>

- **Disability and Mental Health:** The novel offers a rich text for
  disability studies. The depiction of the *struldbruggs* is a
  chillingly realistic portrayal of dementia and the horrors of aging
  without dignity, reflecting an 18th-century shift away from viewing
  disability as a divine sign and toward a more medicalized, and often
  dehumanizing, model.<sup>36</sup> Furthermore, some modern
  psychologists and literary critics have argued that Gulliver himself
  can be read as a compelling portrait of an individual on the autism
  spectrum. His literal-mindedness, social awkwardness, alienation, and
  intense focus on systems and details align with many characteristics
  of Asperger's syndrome.<sup>102</sup> Finally, Gulliver's journey is
  undeniably one of psychological decline, culminating in a complete
  mental breakdown and a retreat into misanthropic madness, making the
  book a powerful, if bleak, exploration of trauma and mental
  health.<sup>9</sup>

### Your Toolkit for Critical Reading (Guide for Students)

Navigating the vast world of information about a classic like
*Gulliver's Travels* can be daunting. Building a strong argument or a
great school project depends on the quality of your sources. This report
was built using a mix of sources, and here’s a guide to help you do the
same.

- **🟢 Trustworthy Sources (The Gold Standard):** These are the sources
  you should always prioritize for facts and serious analysis.

  - **Academic Books and Journals:** Look for publications from
    university presses (like Cambridge University Press <sup>22</sup>)
    and articles in peer-reviewed journals. These have been vetted by
    experts in the field.

  - **Major Cultural Institutions:** Websites of major museums, national
    libraries (like the University of Glasgow Special Collections
    <sup>2</sup>), and official author archives <sup>103</sup> provide
    reliable historical and biographical information.

  - **Polish Trusted Sources:** For research on the Polish context,
    prioritize official cultural portals like **Culture.pl**, the
    **Instytut Książki** (Book Institute), academic databases like
    **BazHum** <sup>105</sup> and  
    **CEJSH** <sup>106</sup>, and the digital archives of the  
    **Biblioteka Narodowa** (National Library) at **polona.pl**.

- **🟡 Use with Caution (Good for Clues, Not for Citation):** These
  sources can be great starting points, but you must verify their claims
  with more reliable sources.

  - **Wikipedia:** An excellent tool for getting a general overview and,
    most importantly, for checking the list of sources at the bottom of
    the page. Never cite a Wikipedia article directly in a school
    paper.<sup>11</sup>

  - **Reputable Online Magazines and Blogs:** These can offer insightful
    contemporary perspectives (e.g., *The Theatre Times* <sup>78</sup>),
    but they are not peer-reviewed. Treat their arguments as interesting
    opinions that need to be backed up by academic evidence.

  - **Polish Sources:** User-review sites like **Lubimyczytać.pl** are
    useful for understanding popular opinion but are not factual
    sources. Student-aid sites like **klp.pl** <sup>107</sup> can
    provide basic summaries, but always double-check them against a
    scholarly edition of the text.

- **🔴 Avoid These (The Red Flags):** These sources are generally
  unreliable for academic work.

  - **Student Essay Mills:** Websites that host collections of student
    essays (like GradesFixer <sup>108</sup> or UKEssays <sup>100</sup>)
    often contain errors, oversimplifications, or plagiarism. They are
    not considered credible sources.

  - **Unverified "Top 10" Lists:** Lists without citations or clear
    authorship are usually clickbait and should not be trusted for
    factual information.

  - **Polish Warning:** Be very wary of *ściągi* (cheat sheet) websites
    like **Bryk.pl**.<sup>109</sup> They are designed for last-minute
    cramming and are often riddled with inaccuracies. Using them for a
    serious project is a recipe for a bad grade.

**Pro Tip:** To develop a truly expert understanding, practice
connecting your sources. When you find a fact in one place, look for
another reliable source that confirms it. When you notice a pattern
across multiple sources—like how many film adaptations remove the
satire—that's where real insight begins. Ask yourself not just "what
happened?" but "why did it happen that way, and what does it mean?"

## Missing Sources and Areas for Further Research

While this report provides a comprehensive overview, the research
process revealed several areas where high-quality, verifiable sources
are lacking. These gaps represent opportunities for future scholarship.

- **Quantitative Data on Polish Education:** Although the presence of
  *Gulliver's Travels* in the Polish school curriculum is
  well-documented, there is a lack of specific statistical data
  regarding its frequency on the *matura* (national high school exit
  exam). Furthermore, detailed academic studies on the pedagogical
  methods employed by Polish teachers to teach the text across different
  historical periods could not be located.

- **Global South and Latin American Reception:** The available
  scholarship is overwhelmingly focused on Europe, North America, and
  East Asia. There is a significant lack of accessible, high-quality
  information on the translation history and critical reception of
  *Gulliver's Travels* in the Arab world, Africa, the Indian
  subcontinent, and Latin America. While some sources allude to Arabic
  <sup>110</sup> and Indian <sup>112</sup> contexts, a deep analysis is
  missing. A truly global understanding of the book's impact requires
  dedicated research into its life in these regions.

- **Contemporary Polish Youth Reception:** The influence of Swift on
  major 20th-century Polish writers is well-established. However, there
  is little to no academic research on how contemporary Polish Gen Z
  readers engage with the book. Ethnographic studies of Polish BookTok
  and BookTube communities, or detailed analysis of reader reviews on
  platforms like Lubimyczytać.pl, would be necessary to understand its
  modern relevance.

- **Economic Impact of Literary Tourism:** Literary tourism sites
  related to Jonathan Swift in Dublin are well-documented.<sup>114</sup>
  However, no sources were found that quantify the economic impact of
  this tourism. Similarly, the claim of a "Gulliver-Kannonzaki Festival"
  in Japan is intriguing but requires verification from primary
  Japanese-language sources to be confirmed as a recurring, officially
  sanctioned event.<sup>45</sup>

## Bibliography

### A. Primary Sources

1.  Swift, Jonathan. *Gulliver's Travels into Several Remote Nations of
    the World*. London: Benjamin Motte, 1726. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

2.  Swift, Jonathan. *The Works of J.S, D.D, D.S.P.D. in Four Volumes*.
    Dublin: George Faulkner, 1735.. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

3.  Swift, Jonathan. *The Correspondence of Jonathan Swift*. Ed. Harold
    Williams. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963-65. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

4.  Swift, Jonathan. Manuscript Material, Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection
    of Shelley and His Circle, The New York Public Library. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>104</sup>

5.  Swift, Jonathan. *Journal to Stella: Letters to Esther Johnson and
    Rebecca Dingley, 1710–1713*. Ed. Abigail Williams. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2013. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>103</sup>

### B. Secondary Sources

#### Polish Sources

1.  Bocheński, Jacek, and Marian Brandys, trans. *Podróże Guliwera*. By
    Jonathan Swift. Warsaw: 1981. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>48</sup>

2.  "Faust, Gustaw-Konrad, Guliwer - Rafał Gąsowski o swoich teatralnych
    kreacjach." *Polskie Radio Jedynka*, 2 August 2022. ⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>47</sup>

3.  Kott, Jan, trans. *Podróże Guliwera w różne kraje dalekie*. By
    Jonathan Swift.. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>46</sup>

4.  Kozicka, Romana. "Wokół motywów swiftowskich w literaturze
    polskiej." PhD diss., Uniwersytet Śląski, 2008. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>117</sup>

5.  Krasicki, Ignacy. *Mikołaja Doświadczyńskiego przypadki*. 1776.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>66</sup>

6.  "Literatura dla dzieci i młodzieży." *Wikipedia, wolna
    encyklopedia*, 2023. ⭐⭐ <sup>50</sup>

7.  Miłosz, Czesław. "Do Jonathana Swifta." 1947. In *Wiersze
    wszystkie*. Kraków: Znak, 2011. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>68</sup>

8.  "Morskie opowieści kapitana Guliwera - Teatr Gry i Ludzie."
    *KupBilecik.pl*. Accessed 2024. ⭐⭐ <sup>79</sup>

9.  Niewiadomska, Cecylia, trans. *Podróże Gulliwera*. By Jonathan
    Swift. 1929. ⭐⭐⭐ <sup>48</sup>

10. "Podróże Guliwera." *Encyklopedia Fantastyki*. Accessed 2024. ⭐⭐
    <sup>46</sup>

11. "Podróże Guliwera." *Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia*, 2023. ⭐⭐
    <sup>48</sup>

12. "Podróże Guliwera dla dorosłych. 'Po tej książce człowiek nie będzie
    spokojny'." *Polskie Radio 24*, 28 October 2022. ⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>117</sup>

13. Słomczyński, Maciej, trans. *Podróże do wielu odległych narodów
    świata*. By Jonathan Swift. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>46</sup>

14. "Teatr Lalek Guliwer." *Teatr Guliwer*. Accessed 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>76</sup>

15. "Z okazji Dnia Dziecka 'Podróże Guliwera' w Teatrze Polskim."
    *Centrum Europejskie UW*, 22 April 2024. ⭐⭐⭐ <sup>119</sup>

#### Academic Sources (English)

1.  "'A Defect in the Mind': Cognitive Ableism in Swift's Gulliver's
    Travels." *ResearchGate*, Conference Paper, November 2020.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>120</sup>

2.  Colombo, Alice. "Reworkings in the Textual History of Gulliver's
    Travels." PhD diss., University of Portsmouth, 2015. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>121</sup>

3.  Cook, Daniel, and Nicholas Seager, eds. *The Cambridge Companion to
    Gulliver's Travels*. Cambridge University Press, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>19</sup>

4.  Downie, J. A. "The political significance of Gulliver's Travels." In
    *Swift and his contexts*, edited by Fischer et al. New York: AMS
    Press, 1989. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>2</sup>

5.  Gordon, Genevieve. "Gulliver's Travels as Proletarian Satire." *The
    Drover Review*, vol. 2, 2019, pp. 8-12. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>124</sup>

6.  Harmening, Louis W. "Religious satire in Swift's Gulliver's
    travels." Master's thesis, Northern Illinois University, 1968.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>28</sup>

7.  Kelly, Patrick. "Swift's Economic Writings and the Irish Economy in
    the 1720s." *The Historical Journal*, vol. 34, no. 1, 1991, pp.
    53-81. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>14</sup>

8.  Kiberd, Declan. *Irish Classics*. Granta Books, 2001. ⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>14</sup>

9.  Lock, F. P. *The politics of Gulliver's Travels*. Oxford: Clarendon
    Press, 1980. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>2</sup>

10. Markley, Robert. "Gulliver and the Japanese: The Limits of the
    Postcolonial Past." *ResearchGate*, 2004. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>113</sup>

11. McBride, Ian. "Swift Against Empire." Inaugural Lecture, University
    of Oxford, 2017. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>15</sup>

12. Phiddian, Robert. "Gulliver's Travels and the Political Allegory."
    *English Literary History*, vol. 63, no. 1, 1996, pp. 49-68.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>5</sup>

13. Rawson, Claude. "Gulliver, Travel, and Empire." *CLCWeb: Comparative
    Literature and Culture*, vol. 14, no. 5, 2012. ⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>94</sup>

14. Real, Hermann J., ed. *The Reception of Jonathan Swift in Europe*.
    Bloomsbury Academic, 2005. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>23</sup>

15. Ryder, John. "The Politics of Gulliver's Travels." *SciSpace*, 2017.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>126</sup>

16. Swift, Jonathan. *Gulliver's Travels*. Broadview Press, 2020.
    \[Academic Edition\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>127</sup>

17. Teerink, H. *A bibliography of the writings of Jonathan Swift*.
    University of Pennsylvania Press, 1963. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>2</sup>

18. Vardi, Liana. "Economics and literature: An examination of
    Gulliver's Travels." *ResearchGate*, 2001. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>97</sup>

19. Zhang, Wen. "Translation and Reception of Jonathan Swift's
    Gulliver's Travels." *Studies in Literature and Language*, vol. 20,
    no. 1, 2020, pp. 1-8. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>43</sup>

#### Popular Sources (Magazines, Reputable Websites, Documentaries)

1.  "Gulliver's Travels." *SparkNotes*. Accessed 2024. ⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>4</sup>

2.  "Gulliver's Travels \| Summary, Characters, Analysis, & Facts."
    *Encyclopædia Britannica*. Accessed 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>1</sup>

3.  "Jonathan Swift: Biography." *Poetry Foundation*. Accessed 2024.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>13</sup>

4.  "Jonathan Swift: Gulliver's Travels." *An Open Companion to Early
    British Literature*. Pressbooks. Accessed 2024. ⭐⭐⭐ <sup>17</sup>

5.  Menzies, Ruth. "Spectacle and Satire: American Film Adaptations of
    Gulliver's Travels." *Criticks Reviews, British Society for
    Eighteenth-Century Studies*, 2020. \[Cultural Criticism\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>81</sup>

6.  Orwell, George. "Politics vs. Literature: An Examination of
    Gulliver's Travels." *The Orwell Foundation*, 1946. \[Literary
    Essay\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>96</sup>

7.  "The Reception of Jonathan Swift in Europe." *OpenEdition Books*.
    Accessed 2024. \[Academic Portal\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>23</sup>

8.  "The story of Gulliver's Travels." *University of Glasgow Library,
    Special Collections*. January 2006. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>2</sup>

#### Digital and Multimedia Sources

1.  Appermont, Bert. *Gulliver's Travels*. Beriato Music
    Publishing, 2000. Musical composition. \[Multimedia\] ⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>131</sup>

2.  *Gulliver's Travels*. Directed by Charles Sturridge, Hallmark
    Entertainment, 1996. TV Miniseries. \[Multimedia\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐
    <sup>83</sup>

3.  *Gulliver's Travels*. Directed by Dave Fleischer, Fleischer
    Studios, 1939. Animated Film. \[Multimedia\] ⭐⭐⭐ <sup>1</sup>

4.  "Gulliver's Travels - Book Summary." *GradeSaver*, YouTube, 29
    August 2019. ⭐⭐⭐ <sup>133</sup>

5.  "Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift \| Summary & Analysis."
    *Course Hero*, YouTube, 2021. \[Video Essay\] ⭐⭐⭐ <sup>87</sup>

6.  *The New Gulliver*. Directed by Aleksandr Ptushko, Mosfilm, 1935.
    Animated Film. \[Multimedia\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐ <sup>42</sup>

7.  "Tags: Gulliver's Travels - Jonathan Swift." *Archive of Our Own*.
    Accessed 2024. \[Fan Community\] ⭐⭐ <sup>90</sup>

8.  @\_taylorroche. "Gulliver's Travels: A Message to World Leaders."
    *TikTok*, 2024. ⭐ <sup>88</sup>

#### Cytowane prace

1.  Gulliver's Travels \| Summary, Characters, Analysis, & Facts -
    Britannica, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/topic/Gullivers-Travels</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Gullivers-Travels)

2.  Gulliver's Travels - University of Glasgow, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.gla.ac.uk/myglasgow/library/files/special/exhibns/month/jan2006.html</u>](https://www.gla.ac.uk/myglasgow/library/files/special/exhibns/month/jan2006.html)

3.  13.0: Jonathan Swift- Biography - Humanities LibreTexts, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://human.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Literature_and_Literacy/British_and_Irish_Literature/English_Literature_I\_(Lumen)/13%3A_Gullivers_Travels/13.00%3A_Jonathan_Swift-\_Biography</u>](https://human.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Literature_and_Literacy/British_and_Irish_Literature/English_Literature_I_(Lumen)/13%3A_Gullivers_Travels/13.00%3A_Jonathan_Swift-_Biography)

4.  Gulliver's Travels: Study Guide - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/)

5.  The Polticial Implications of Gulliver's Travels - XULA Digital
    Commons, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://digitalcommons.xula.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1066&context=xulanexus</u>](https://digitalcommons.xula.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1066&context=xulanexus)

6.  Gulliver's Travels - Jonathan Swift, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tmv.edu.in/pdf/Distance_education/MA(English)/EnglishFiction.pdf</u>](https://www.tmv.edu.in/pdf/Distance_education/MA(English)/EnglishFiction.pdf)

7.  Swift's Use of Satire in Gulliver's Travels Romana Rouf Chowdhury,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://tmv.ac.in/ematerial/english/ss/SEM%202%20Gullivers%20Travles%20detailed%20satire.pdf</u>](https://tmv.ac.in/ematerial/english/ss/SEM%202%20Gullivers%20Travles%20detailed%20satire.pdf)

8.  Gulliver's Travels: Full Book Analysis - SparkNotes, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/plot-analysis/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/plot-analysis/)

9.  A Critical Study of Gulliver's Significance to the Satire in
    Gulliver's Travels (1949) - CORE, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/289019674.pdf</u>](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/289019674.pdf)

10. Language and memory disorder in the case of Jonathan Swift ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/129/11/3127/290809</u>](https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/129/11/3127/290809)

11. Gulliver's Travels - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gulliver%27s_Travels</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gulliver%27s_Travels)

12. Gulliver's Travels \| Encyclopedia.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/educational-magazines/gullivers-travels</u>](https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/educational-magazines/gullivers-travels)

13. Jonathan Swift \| The Poetry Foundation, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/jonathan-swift</u>](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/jonathan-swift)

14. The Political Economy of Swift's Satires and other Prose Works,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://journals.openedition.org/oeconomia/1021?lang=en</u>](https://journals.openedition.org/oeconomia/1021?lang=en)

15. Swift against Empire \| Faculty of History, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.history.ox.ac.uk/event/swift-against-empire-prof-ian-mcbrides-inaugural-lecture</u>](https://www.history.ox.ac.uk/event/swift-against-empire-prof-ian-mcbrides-inaugural-lecture)

16. 18th Century Political Satire as Exemplified by Jonathan Swift
    through "Gulliver's Travels" - CORE, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/232827641.pdf</u>](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/232827641.pdf)

17. Jonathan Swift: Gulliver's Travels – An Open Companion to Early
    British Literature, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pressbooks.pub/earlybritishlit/chapter/gullivers-travels-by-jonathan-swift/</u>](https://pressbooks.pub/earlybritishlit/chapter/gullivers-travels-by-jonathan-swift/)

18. Censorship, libel and self-censorship (Chapter Nine) - Jonathan
    Swift and the Eighteenth-Century Book - Cambridge University Press,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/jonathan-swift-and-the-eighteenthcentury-book/censorship-libel-and-selfcensorship/E1E09568C40E2CED75C484B67C32A02B</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/jonathan-swift-and-the-eighteenthcentury-book/censorship-libel-and-selfcensorship/E1E09568C40E2CED75C484B67C32A02B)

19. Bodies and Gender (Chapter 3) - The Cambridge Companion to
    Gulliver's Travels, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/bodies-and-gender/46452E3CAD01448AACB26BF3F30659C7</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/bodies-and-gender/46452E3CAD01448AACB26BF3F30659C7)

20. Culture Shock: Flashpoints: Literature: Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's
    Travels - PBS, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/cultureshock/flashpoints/literature/gulliver.html</u>](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/cultureshock/flashpoints/literature/gulliver.html)

21. Gulliver's Travels - Project Gutenberg, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.gutenberg.org/files/17157/17157-h/17157-h.htm</u>](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/17157/17157-h/17157-h.htm)

22. Critical Reception (Chapter 14) - The Cambridge Companion to
    Gulliver's Travels, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/critical-reception/7F8BEBF30E46B0B0DB8016558E93672E</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/critical-reception/7F8BEBF30E46B0B0DB8016558E93672E)

23. The Reception of Gulliver's Travels in Britain and Ireland, France,
    and Germany, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://books.openedition.org/puc/362</u>](https://books.openedition.org/puc/362)

24. Gullivers As An Allegory \| PDF - Scribd, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.scribd.com/document/624891203/gullivers-as-an-allegory</u>](https://www.scribd.com/document/624891203/gullivers-as-an-allegory)

25. Gulliver's Travels: Symbols \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/symbols/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/symbols/)

26. Gulliver's Travels - English Lecturer, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.english-lecturer.com/gullivers-travels/</u>](https://www.english-lecturer.com/gullivers-travels/)

27. Q: Compare and contrast the Liliputians and the Brobdingnagians in
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://rsmraiganj.in/wp-content/themes/raiganj-surendranath-mahavidyalaya/pdf/1586507311_liliput%20and%20brobdingnagians%20contrast-converted.pdf</u>](https://rsmraiganj.in/wp-content/themes/raiganj-surendranath-mahavidyalaya/pdf/1586507311_liliput%20and%20brobdingnagians%20contrast-converted.pdf)

28. huskiecommons.lib.niu.edu, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://huskiecommons.lib.niu.edu/allgraduate-thesesdissertations/4729/#:~:text=In%20Gulliver's%20voyage%20to%20Lilliput,secondary%20importance%20to%20political%20satire.</u>](https://huskiecommons.lib.niu.edu/allgraduate-thesesdissertations/4729/#:~:text=In%20Gulliver's%20voyage%20to%20Lilliput,secondary%20importance%20to%20political%20satire.)

29. Themes Motifs and Symbols \| PDF \| Gulliver's Travels \| Utopia -
    Scribd, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.scribd.com/document/218420391/Themes-Motifs-and-Symbols</u>](https://www.scribd.com/document/218420391/Themes-Motifs-and-Symbols)

30. Book Review: Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://booksatruestory.com/2018/07/06/book-review-gullivers-travels-jonathan-swift/</u>](https://booksatruestory.com/2018/07/06/book-review-gullivers-travels-jonathan-swift/)

31. Brobdingnag - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brobdingnag</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brobdingnag)

32. Quotes from Gulliver's Travels \| bartleby, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.bartleby.com/lit/gullivers-travels/quotes</u>](https://www.bartleby.com/lit/gullivers-travels/quotes)

33. A Postcolonial Analysis of Cultural Relativism In Jonathan Swift's
    Gulliver's Travels.docx - Skemman, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://skemman.is/bitstream/1946/46685/1/Traveler%27s%20Guilt\_%20A%20Postcolonial%20Analysis%20of%20Cultural%20Relativism%20In%20Jonathan%20Swift%27s%20Gulliver%27s%20Travels.docx%20%281%29.pdf</u>](https://skemman.is/bitstream/1946/46685/1/Traveler%27s%20Guilt_%20A%20Postcolonial%20Analysis%20of%20Cultural%20Relativism%20In%20Jonathan%20Swift%27s%20Gulliver%27s%20Travels.docx%20%281%29.pdf)

34. Gulliver as Both Oppressor and Oppressed – Black & Green Atlantic -
    Notre Dame Sites, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://sites.nd.edu/blackandgreenatlantic/2020/02/07/gulliver-as-both-oppressor-and-oppressed/</u>](https://sites.nd.edu/blackandgreenatlantic/2020/02/07/gulliver-as-both-oppressor-and-oppressed/)

35. Gulliver's Travels: Themes - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/themes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/themes/)

36. Swift's GULLIVER'S TRAVELS, Bk 3 \| Enlightenment and Disability,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://enlightanddis.wordpress.com/spectacles-of-deviance/physical-deformity/jonathan-swift-gullivers-travels-bk-3/</u>](https://enlightanddis.wordpress.com/spectacles-of-deviance/physical-deformity/jonathan-swift-gullivers-travels-bk-3/)

37. Gulliver's Travels - Satire, Adventure, Voyages \| Britannica,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/topic/Gullivers-Travels/Analysis</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Gullivers-Travels/Analysis)

38. Good Horse Sense: Swift and the Houyhnhnm \| British Literature
    1700-1900, A Course Blog, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://britlitsurvey2.wordpress.com/2019/09/12/good-horse-sense/</u>](https://britlitsurvey2.wordpress.com/2019/09/12/good-horse-sense/)

39. Saying, and Hearing, the "Thing Which Is Not" - Psychology Today,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/time-travelling-apollo/201802/saying-and-hearing-the-thing-which-is-not</u>](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/time-travelling-apollo/201802/saying-and-hearing-the-thing-which-is-not)

40. Gulliver's Travels: Famous Quotes Explained \| SparkNotes,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/quotes/page/5/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/quotes/page/5/)

41. Visual Culture (Chapter 16) - The Cambridge Companion to ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/visual-culture/CFA460A0E6745AF74C667BD28F1AD136</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/visual-culture/CFA460A0E6745AF74C667BD28F1AD136)

42. The New Gulliver - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_New_Gulliver</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_New_Gulliver)

43. Translation and Reception of Jonathan Swift's ... - CSCanada,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://cscanada.net/index.php/sll/article/download/11480/11459</u>](http://cscanada.net/index.php/sll/article/download/11480/11459)

44. Japan and Gulliver's Travels - Armagh Robinson Library, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://armaghrobinsonlibrary.co.uk/japan-and-gullivers-travels/</u>](https://armaghrobinsonlibrary.co.uk/japan-and-gullivers-travels/)

45. Gulliver's Travels Wasn't Meant to Be a Children's Book And More
    Things You Didn't Know About the Literary Classic - Smithsonian
    Magazine, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/eight-surprising-things-its-time-you-knew-about-gullivers-travels-180967328/</u>](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/eight-surprising-things-its-time-you-knew-about-gullivers-travels-180967328/)

46. Podróże Guliwera – encyklopediafantastyki.pl, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://encyklopediafantastyki.pl/index.php?title=Podr%C3%B3%C5%BCe_Guliwera</u>](https://encyklopediafantastyki.pl/index.php?title=Podr%C3%B3%C5%BCe_Guliwera)

47. Faust, Gustaw-Konrad, Guliwer - Rafał Gąsowski o swoich teatralnych
    kreacjach, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://jedynka.polskieradio.pl/artykul/2780699,Faust-Gustaw-Konrad-Guliwer---Rafa%C5%82-G%C4%85sowski-o-swoich-teatralnych-kreacjach</u>](https://jedynka.polskieradio.pl/artykul/2780699,Faust-Gustaw-Konrad-Guliwer---Rafa%C5%82-G%C4%85sowski-o-swoich-teatralnych-kreacjach)

48. Podróże Guliwera – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Podr%C3%B3%C5%BCe_Guliwera</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Podr%C3%B3%C5%BCe_Guliwera)

49. Barataria 77 Swift – Ewa Maria and Friends - Ewa Maria Blog,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ewamaria.blog/2018/08/06/barataria-77-swift/</u>](https://ewamaria.blog/2018/08/06/barataria-77-swift/)

50. Literatura dla dzieci i młodzieży – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literatura_dla_dzieci_i_m%C5%82odzie%C5%BCy</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literatura_dla_dzieci_i_m%C5%82odzie%C5%BCy)

51. LOS VIAJES DE GULLIVER \| Jonathan Swift \| VALDEMAR \| Casa del
    Libro Colombia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.casadellibro.com.co/libro-los-viajes-de-gulliver/9788477024583/938658</u>](https://www.casadellibro.com.co/libro-los-viajes-de-gulliver/9788477024583/938658)

52. INFORMACIÓN - Miriada Hispánica, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.miriadahispanica.com/revista/b2303629b841f0ed28d21368789e753f6c38130c.pdf</u>](https://www.miriadahispanica.com/revista/b2303629b841f0ed28d21368789e753f6c38130c.pdf)

53. On the Differences between Gulliver's Travels and Han Man You -
    Taylor & Francis Online, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/0895769X.2022.2128287</u>](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/0895769X.2022.2128287)

54. Podróże Guliwera Jonathan Swift Greg Oprawa twarda Lektura z
    opracowaniem, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://papirus24.pl/podroze-guliwera-jonathan-swift-greg-oprawa-twarda-lektura-z-opracowaniem-p-776.html</u>](https://papirus24.pl/podroze-guliwera-jonathan-swift-greg-oprawa-twarda-lektura-z-opracowaniem-p-776.html)

55. Książki nie tylko dla dzieci. O pewnym podróżniku i pewnym
    rozbitku - Lubimyczytać, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/aktualnosci/12897/ksiazki-nie-tylko-dla-dzieci-o-pewnym-podrozniku-i-pewnym-rozbitku</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/aktualnosci/12897/ksiazki-nie-tylko-dla-dzieci-o-pewnym-podrozniku-i-pewnym-rozbitku)

56. Podróże Guliwera - Jacek Bocheński, Marian Brandys \| Książka w
    Lubimyczytac.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/81396/podroze-guliwera</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/81396/podroze-guliwera)

57. Nowy "Radiobook": "Mikołaja Doświadczyńskiego przypadki" Ignacego
    Krasickiego cz. II \[POSŁUCHAJ\] - Jedynka - polskieradio.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://jedynka.polskieradio.pl/artykul/3316833,Nowy-Radiobook-Miko%C5%82aja-Dos%CC%81wiadczyn%CC%81skiego-przypadki-Ignacego-Krasickiego-cz-II-\[POS%C5%81UCHAJ\]</u>](https://jedynka.polskieradio.pl/artykul/3316833,Nowy-Radiobook-Miko%C5%82aja-Dos%CC%81wiadczyn%CC%81skiego-przypadki-Ignacego-Krasickiego-cz-II-%5BPOS%C5%81UCHAJ%5D)

58. Konkurs Pięknego Czytania - Szkoła Podstawowa w Glisnem, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://szkolaglisne.edupage.org/?eqa=d2lkPWhvbWVfTmV3c18xX3AmbmV3c2FyY2hpdmVmPSZvZmZzZXRfaG9tZV9OZXdzXzFfcD0zMjA%3D</u>](https://szkolaglisne.edupage.org/?eqa=d2lkPWhvbWVfTmV3c18xX3AmbmV3c2FyY2hpdmVmPSZvZmZzZXRfaG9tZV9OZXdzXzFfcD0zMjA%3D)

59. Forum OSKKO, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://oskko.edu.pl/forum/watek.php?w=57756&s=2</u>](https://oskko.edu.pl/forum/watek.php?w=57756&s=2)

60. Ponad słowami, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.lozagan.pl/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/Program-nauczania.pdf</u>](http://www.lozagan.pl/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/Program-nauczania.pdf)

61. Przewodnik po tematach Olimpiady Literatury i Języka Polskiego -
    RCIN, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://rcin.org.pl/Content/121466/WA248_151394_II-84636_olimp_o.pdf</u>](https://rcin.org.pl/Content/121466/WA248_151394_II-84636_olimp_o.pdf)

62. Matura Exam in Poland, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.polandeducation.info/tests/polish-matura.html</u>](https://www.polandeducation.info/tests/polish-matura.html)

63. Shooting an Elephant and Other Essays - Ebook - George Orwell,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://biblio.ebookpoint.pl/e_2aqf/shooting-an-elephant-and-other-essays-george-orwell/p?jezyk=en</u>](https://biblio.ebookpoint.pl/e_2aqf/shooting-an-elephant-and-other-essays-george-orwell/p?jezyk=en)

64. Bajki i przypowieści \| work by Krasicki - Britannica, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/topic/Bajki-i-przypowiesci</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Bajki-i-przypowiesci)

65. Ignacy Krasicki \| EBSCO Research Starters, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/biography/ignacy-krasicki</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/biography/ignacy-krasicki)

66. Untitled - Biblioteka Nauki, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bibliotekanauki.pl/articles/623997.pdf</u>](https://bibliotekanauki.pl/articles/623997.pdf)

67. Ignacy Krasicki, "Mikołaja Doświadczyńskiego przypadki" \|
    \#literatura - Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/pl/dzielo/ignacy-krasicki-mikolaja-doswiadczynskiego-przypadki</u>](https://culture.pl/pl/dzielo/ignacy-krasicki-mikolaja-doswiadczynskiego-przypadki)

68. Ambassador of dreams \| The New Criterion, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://newcriterion.com/article/ambassador-of-dreams/</u>](https://newcriterion.com/article/ambassador-of-dreams/)

69. (PDF) Czesław Miłosz' American Experience in Światło dzienne
    (Daylight) - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318414348_Czeslaw_Milosz'\_American_Experience_in_Swiatlo_dzienne_Daylight</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318414348_Czeslaw_Milosz'_American_Experience_in_Swiatlo_dzienne_Daylight)

70. Intertekstualność nazewniczych neologizmów w ... - Język Polski,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.jezyk-polski.pl/index.php/jp/article/download/38/10</u>](https://www.jezyk-polski.pl/index.php/jp/article/download/38/10)

71. The Star Diaries by Stanisław Lem \| EBSCO Research Starters,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/star-diaries-stanislaw-lem</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/star-diaries-stanislaw-lem)

72. Stanisław Lem Criticism - eNotes.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.enotes.com/topics/stanis-aw-lem/criticism</u>](https://www.enotes.com/topics/stanis-aw-lem/criticism)

73. Science Fiction and Communist Reality - FEE.org, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://fee.org/articles/science-fiction-and-communist-reality/</u>](https://fee.org/articles/science-fiction-and-communist-reality/)

74. Lem, Stanisław - SFE, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://sf-encyclopedia.com/entry/lem_stanislaw</u>](https://sf-encyclopedia.com/entry/lem_stanislaw)

75. O nas Teatr Lalek Guliwer istnieje w Warszawie od ponad 75 lat.
    Guliwer należy do najstarszych scen dla dzieci w Warszawie i w - UM
    Warszawa, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://um.warszawa.pl/documents/61166/75758985/Oferta+Teatru+Lalek+Guliwer.pdf/9ee0d47c-6adc-4076-b56c-88dfd218a051?t=1680775310288</u>](https://um.warszawa.pl/documents/61166/75758985/Oferta+Teatru+Lalek+Guliwer.pdf/9ee0d47c-6adc-4076-b56c-88dfd218a051?t=1680775310288)

76. O nas - Teatr Lalek Guliwer, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://teatrguliwer.pl/o-nas/</u>](https://teatrguliwer.pl/o-nas/)

77. Teatr Lalek Guliwer – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teatr_Lalek_Guliwer</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teatr_Lalek_Guliwer)

78. "Gulliver's Travels": a Lesson in Satire for Children. - The Theatre
    Times, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://thetheatretimes.com/gullivers-travels-a-lesson-in-satire-for-children/</u>](https://thetheatretimes.com/gullivers-travels-a-lesson-in-satire-for-children/)

79. Morskie opowieści kapitana Guliwera - Teatr Gry i Ludzie / Katowice
    / 2024-09-22, 12:00 ZAMÓW BILET NA KUPBILECIK (BILETY ONLINE),
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.kupbilecik.pl/imprezy/136227/Katowice/Morskie+opowie%C5%9Bci+kapitana+Guliwera+-+Teatr+Gry+i+Ludzie/</u>](https://www.kupbilecik.pl/imprezy/136227/Katowice/Morskie+opowie%C5%9Bci+kapitana+Guliwera+-+Teatr+Gry+i+Ludzie/)

80. Biuro turystyczne Legionowo Guliwer - zajęcia dla uczniów,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bt-guliwer.pl/</u>](https://www.bt-guliwer.pl/)

81. Spectacle and Satire: American Film Adaptations of Gulliver's
    Travels - BSECS, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bsecs.org.uk/criticks-reviews/spectacle-and-satire-american-film-adaptations-of-gullivers-travels/</u>](https://www.bsecs.org.uk/criticks-reviews/spectacle-and-satire-american-film-adaptations-of-gullivers-travels/)

82. Max Fleischer's Gulliver's Travels - DVD Talk, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.dvdtalk.com/reviews/36545/max-fleischers-gullivers-travels/</u>](https://www.dvdtalk.com/reviews/36545/max-fleischers-gullivers-travels/)

83. Gulliver's Travels (miniseries) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gulliver%27s_Travels\_(miniseries)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gulliver%27s_Travels_(miniseries))

84. Gulliver's Travels (1996) - Seeing Things Secondhand, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://seeingthingssecondhand.com/2016/09/14/gullivers-travels-1996/</u>](https://seeingthingssecondhand.com/2016/09/14/gullivers-travels-1996/)

85. Gulliver's Travels - Paste Magazine, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.pastemagazine.com/movies/gullivers-travels-review</u>](https://www.pastemagazine.com/movies/gullivers-travels-review)

86. Review: Gulliver's Travels from GoFatherhood®, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://gofatherhood.com/2010/12/review-gullivers-travels/</u>](https://gofatherhood.com/2010/12/review-gullivers-travels/)

87. Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift \| Summary & Analysis -
    YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ohl5b65Iz2Q</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ohl5b65Iz2Q)

88. Gulliver's Travels: A Message to World Leaders \| TikTok, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@\_taylorroche/video/7516852461781421330</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@_taylorroche/video/7516852461781421330)

89. Exploring Fun Facts Behind Gulliver's Travels \| Crayola Kids
    Adventures \| TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@thisisadamwylie/video/6940722460706802950</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@thisisadamwylie/video/6940722460706802950)

90. Gulliver's Travels - Jonathan Swift - Works \| Archive of Our Own,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://archiveofourown.org/tags/Gulliver's%20Travels%20-%20Jonathan%20Swift/works</u>](https://archiveofourown.org/tags/Gulliver's%20Travels%20-%20Jonathan%20Swift/works)

91. Gulliver's Travels OC: Tess by LoverofUnicorns96 on DeviantArt,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.deviantart.com/loverofunicorns96/art/Gulliver-s-Travels-OC-Tess-1178382366</u>](https://www.deviantart.com/loverofunicorns96/art/Gulliver-s-Travels-OC-Tess-1178382366)

92. Famous Literary Fandoms: 10 Notable Works of Fan Fiction \|
    Definition, Examples, Websites, Books, Stories, & Movies \|
    Britannica, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/art/Famous-Literary-Fandoms-10-Notable-Works-of-Fan-Fiction</u>](https://www.britannica.com/art/Famous-Literary-Fandoms-10-Notable-Works-of-Fan-Fiction)

93. Fan Fiction: Origins and Cultural Impact (Since the 18th Century
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://learnaboutpod.com/ep-132/</u>](https://learnaboutpod.com/ep-132/)

94. "Gulliver, Travel, and Empire" by Claude Rawson - Purdue e-Pubs,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol14/iss5/7/</u>](https://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol14/iss5/7/)

95. Exploring Colonialism and Identity in Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's
    Travels - The Academic is an International Journal of
    Multidisciplinary Research, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://theacademic.in/wp-content/uploads/2025/02/18.pdf</u>](https://theacademic.in/wp-content/uploads/2025/02/18.pdf)

96. Politics vs. Literature: An examination of Gulliver's Travels \| The
    Orwell Foundation, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.orwellfoundation.com/the-orwell-foundation/orwell/essays-and-other-works/politics-vs-literature-an-examination-of-gullivers-travels/</u>](https://www.orwellfoundation.com/the-orwell-foundation/orwell/essays-and-other-works/politics-vs-literature-an-examination-of-gullivers-travels/)

97. (PDF) Economics and literature: An examination of Gulliver's
    Travels - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227360136_Economics_and_literature_An_examination_of_Gulliver's_Travels</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227360136_Economics_and_literature_An_examination_of_Gulliver's_Travels)

98. Female Representations in “Gulliver's Travels” - 2336 Words \|
    Bartleby, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Female-Representations-in-Gullivers-Travels-P3Z9ZCK4K6YZS</u>](https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Female-Representations-in-Gullivers-Travels-P3Z9ZCK4K6YZS)

99. Gulliver's Travels Theme of Gender - Shmoop, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/gullivers-travels/gender-theme.html</u>](https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/gullivers-travels/gender-theme.html)

100. Feminist Approach To Gullivers Travels English Literature Essay \|
     UKEssays.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ukessays.com/essays/english-literature/feminist-approach-to-gullivers-travels-english-literature-essay.php</u>](https://www.ukessays.com/essays/english-literature/feminist-approach-to-gullivers-travels-english-literature-essay.php)

101. Gulliver's Travel Beyond the Gender Binary: Lemuel Gulliver as
     Transgender - Digital Commons @ Winthrop, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://digitalcommons.winthrop.edu/source/SOURCE_2016/allpresentations/57/</u>](https://digitalcommons.winthrop.edu/source/SOURCE_2016/allpresentations/57/)

102. Gulliver's Travels: Another Classic Portrayal of Autism -
     Psychology Today, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-imprinted-brain/201707/gullivers-travels-another-classic-portrayal-of-autism</u>](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-imprinted-brain/201707/gullivers-travels-another-classic-portrayal-of-autism)

103. The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Jonathan Swift, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/series/cambridge-edition-of-the-works-of-jonathan-swift/6E551032CF9FEBD7C54938EDD4FDA77C</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/series/cambridge-edition-of-the-works-of-jonathan-swift/6E551032CF9FEBD7C54938EDD4FDA77C)

104. Jonathan Swift manuscript material, 1728 - NYPL Archives - The New
     York Public Library, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://archives.nypl.org/cps/23804</u>](https://archives.nypl.org/cps/23804)

105. Jacek Mikoś Swift's world comedy = Swifta komedia świata - Bazhum,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://bazhum.muzhp.pl/media/texts/annales-universitatis-mariae-curie-skodowska-sectio-f-nauki-filozoficzne-i-humanistyczne/1962-tom-17/annales_universitatis_mariae_curie_sklodowska_sectio_f_nauki_filozoficzne_i_humanistyczne-r1962-t17-s27-38.pdf</u>](https://bazhum.muzhp.pl/media/texts/annales-universitatis-mariae-curie-skodowska-sectio-f-nauki-filozoficzne-i-humanistyczne/1962-tom-17/annales_universitatis_mariae_curie_sklodowska_sectio_f_nauki_filozoficzne_i_humanistyczne-r1962-t17-s27-38.pdf)

106. Download - The European Journal of Humour Research, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://europeanjournalofhumour.org/ejhr/article/download/282/pdf/985</u>](https://europeanjournalofhumour.org/ejhr/article/download/282/pdf/985)

107. Antyutopia w literaturze - klp.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://klp.pl/motywy-literackie/a-5385.html</u>](https://klp.pl/motywy-literackie/a-5385.html)

108. Gulliver's Travels: The Role of Religion in Lilliput Politics
     \[Essay Example\] by GradesFixer, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://gradesfixer.com/free-essay-examples/broken-eggs-and-scrambled-schisms-in-gullivers-travels/</u>](https://gradesfixer.com/free-essay-examples/broken-eggs-and-scrambled-schisms-in-gullivers-travels/)

109. Podróże Guliwera - Streszczenie szczegółowe - Jonathan Swift -
     Bryk.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bryk.pl/lektury/jonathan-swift/podroze-guliwera.streszczenie-szczegolowe</u>](https://www.bryk.pl/lektury/jonathan-swift/podroze-guliwera.streszczenie-szczegolowe)

110. The Genesis of the Translation of Children's Classics: A ...,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://awej-tls.org/the-genesis-of-the-translation-of-childrens-classics-a-bourdieusian-account-of-%CA%BFabd-al-fatta%E1%B8%A5-%E1%B9%A3abris-translation-of-gullivers-travels-1909/</u>](https://awej-tls.org/the-genesis-of-the-translation-of-childrens-classics-a-bourdieusian-account-of-%CA%BFabd-al-fatta%E1%B8%A5-%E1%B9%A3abris-translation-of-gullivers-travels-1909/)

111. Ana María Homero Cori co Universidad de Zaragoza La adaptación al
     cine o a la televisión tiene una importancia considerable c -
     Anubar Ediciones, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.anubar.com/colfi/pdf/TF13/Hornero%20Producciones%20audiovisuales.pdf</u>](https://www.anubar.com/colfi/pdf/TF13/Hornero%20Producciones%20audiovisuales.pdf)

112. Post Colonial Readings \| PDF \| Postcolonialism \| Orientalism
     (Book), otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.scribd.com/document/369183891/Post-Colonial-Readings</u>](https://www.scribd.com/document/369183891/Post-Colonial-Readings)

113. Gulliver and the Japanese: The Limits of the Postcolonial Past -
     ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/31030144_Gulliver_and_the_Japanese_The_Limits_of_the_Postcolonial_Past</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/31030144_Gulliver_and_the_Japanese_The_Limits_of_the_Postcolonial_Past)

114. Gulliver's Travels \| Dublin UNESCO City of literature, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.dublincityofliterature.ie/literary-city/read-watch-listen/gullivers-travels</u>](https://www.dublincityofliterature.ie/literary-city/read-watch-listen/gullivers-travels)

115. Swift's Dublin: A Walking Tour, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.culturedatewithdublin8.ie/whats-on/swifts-dublin-a-walking-tour</u>](https://www.culturedatewithdublin8.ie/whats-on/swifts-dublin-a-walking-tour)

116. Explore Dublin's Literary Scene with Visit Dublin, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.visitdublin.com/guides/literary</u>](https://www.visitdublin.com/guides/literary)

117. "Podróże Guliwera" dla dorosłych. "Po tej książce człowiek nie
     będzie spokojny", otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://polskieradio24.pl/artykul/3078389,podroze-guliwera-dla-doroslych-po-tej-ksiazce-czlowiek-nie-bedzie-spokojny</u>](https://polskieradio24.pl/artykul/3078389,podroze-guliwera-dla-doroslych-po-tej-ksiazce-czlowiek-nie-bedzie-spokojny)

118. Królestwa - Teatr Lalek Guliwer, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://teatrguliwer.pl/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/Teatr-Guliwer-PRZEDPRZEWODNIK-Krolestwa-09_03.pdf</u>](https://teatrguliwer.pl/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/Teatr-Guliwer-PRZEDPRZEWODNIK-Krolestwa-09_03.pdf)

119. Z okazji Dnia Dziecka "Podróże Guliwera" w Teatrze Polskim -
     Centrum Europejskie UW, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ce.uw.edu.pl/z-okazji-dnia-dziecka-podroze-guliwera-w-teatrze-polskim/</u>](https://www.ce.uw.edu.pl/z-okazji-dnia-dziecka-podroze-guliwera-w-teatrze-polskim/)

120. 'A Defect in the Mind': Cognitive Ableism in Swift's Gulliver's
     Travels - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/345605149\_'A_Defect_in_the_Mind'\_Cognitive_Ableism_in_Swift's_Gulliver's_Travels</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/345605149_'A_Defect_in_the_Mind'_Cognitive_Ableism_in_Swift's_Gulliver's_Travels)

121. Reworkings in the textual history of Gulliver's Travels: a
     translational approach - University of Portsmouth, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://puretest.port.ac.uk/files/5899316/Alice_Colmbo_PhD_Thesis_Reworkings_in_the_Textual_Histor.pdf</u>](https://puretest.port.ac.uk/files/5899316/Alice_Colmbo_PhD_Thesis_Reworkings_in_the_Textual_Histor.pdf)

122. Philosophical Tale (Chapter 8) - The Cambridge Companion to ...,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/philosophical-tale/1E8E901794D6B0F3CC3B450A4BDB3730</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/philosophical-tale/1E8E901794D6B0F3CC3B450A4BDB3730)

123. Religion (Chapter 2) - The Cambridge Companion to Gulliver's
     Travels, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/religion/00F172BD7A9F75355AF69A08F9F6049C</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-gullivers-travels/religion/00F172BD7A9F75355AF69A08F9F6049C)

124. Gulliver as Swift's Every-Proletarian - Dehumanization, Alienation,
     and Labor - WordPress.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://droverreview.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/drvol2201908gordon.pdf</u>](https://droverreview.files.wordpress.com/2019/06/drvol2201908gordon.pdf)

125. "Religious satire in Swift's Gulliver's travels" by Louis W.
     Harmening, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://huskiecommons.lib.niu.edu/allgraduate-thesesdissertations/4729/</u>](https://huskiecommons.lib.niu.edu/allgraduate-thesesdissertations/4729/)

126. The Politics of Gulliver's Travels - SciSpace, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://scispace.com/pdf/the-politics-of-gulliver-s-travels-2isnnfrq5c.pdf</u>](https://scispace.com/pdf/the-politics-of-gulliver-s-travels-2isnnfrq5c.pdf)

127. Gulliver's Travels \| Broadview Press, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://files.broadviewpress.com/exams/uploads/2020/01/GulliversTravels.pdf</u>](https://files.broadviewpress.com/exams/uploads/2020/01/GulliversTravels.pdf)

128. Gulliver's Travels - Broadview Press, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://broadviewpress.com/product/gullivers-travels/</u>](https://broadviewpress.com/product/gullivers-travels/)

129. Translation and Reception of Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels in
     China \| LIN \| Studies in Literature and Language - CSCanada,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>http://www.cscanada.net/index.php/sll/article/view/11480</u>](http://www.cscanada.net/index.php/sll/article/view/11480)

130. Gulliver's Travels Part 1: Chapter 1 Quotes - SparkNotes,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/quotes/section/part-i-chapter-i/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gulliver/quotes/section/part-i-chapter-i/)

131. Gulliver's Travels \| Bert Appermont \| Music \| BMP0004057 -
     Rundel, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.rundel.de/en/article/gulliver_s_travels/BMP0004057</u>](https://www.rundel.de/en/article/gulliver_s_travels/BMP0004057)

132. Gulliver's Travels – Bert Appermont - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hBl3H7D-6J4</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hBl3H7D-6J4)

133. Gulliver's Travels - Book Summary - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SLE8F1TG7Yc</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SLE8F1TG7Yc)

134. The New Gulliver (1935) movie - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CkW8v_qbQbI&pp=0gcJCfwAo7VqN5tD</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CkW8v_qbQbI&pp=0gcJCfwAo7VqN5tD)
