# ***Nineteen Eighty-Four***: A Global Warning, An International Story

## Part I: The World That Made the Book

### Section 1: Why Should You Care? Big Brother in Your Pocket

More than seventy-five years after its publication, George Orwell’s
*Nineteen Eighty-Four* remains one of the most powerful and unsettling
books ever written.<sup>1</sup> Its title alone evokes a chilling vision
of a future where freedom is an illusion and truth is whatever the
government says it is. But why should a novel written in the desolate
aftermath of World War II matter to you today, in a world of
smartphones, social media, and instant global communication?<sup>2</sup>
The unsettling answer is that Orwell’s nightmare, once a distant
warning, now feels eerily familiar. The architecture of control he
imagined has been built, not always by governments, but often by the
very technologies we embrace every day.

The novel’s vocabulary has become the essential lexicon for our modern
anxieties.<sup>4</sup> Terms like "Big Brother," "Thought Police,"
"doublethink," and "Newspeak" are no longer just literary concepts; they
are part of our everyday language, used to describe everything from
government surveillance to corporate data mining and political
spin.<sup>4</sup> Orwell’s fictional "telescreen," a two-way television
that watched and listened to every citizen, was a terrifying piece of
science fiction in 1949.<sup>3</sup> Today, we willingly carry devices
far more powerful than telescreens in our pockets, equipped with
cameras, microphones, and location trackers that share our data with a
vast, unseen network.<sup>5</sup>

This connection becomes even clearer when examining the world of social
media. The Party in *Nineteen Eighty-Four* maintained power through the
Ministry of Truth, an institution dedicated to rewriting history and
controlling information.<sup>2</sup> In the 21st century, social media
platforms can function as a decentralized, user-driven Ministry of
Truth. Algorithm-driven feeds create echo chambers where "fake news"
spreads rapidly, and our online identities are carefully curated
versions of reality.<sup>7</sup> The Party’s goal was to make its
version of the truth the only one available; today, we often choose to
live inside digital bubbles that reinforce what we already believe,
effectively censoring reality for ourselves.<sup>8</sup>

The novel’s enduring power is not just for political analysts; it is a
living text, constantly being rediscovered and reinterpreted by new
generations. On platforms like TikTok, the hashtag \#BookTok is filled
with young readers passionately discussing *Nineteen Eighty-Four*,
connecting its themes of rebellion, love, and psychological struggle to
their own lives and the political climate they inhabit.<sup>9</sup> In
the United States, for example, the book is frequently invoked to
understand the country's turbulent political atmosphere, with readers
seeing its warnings reflected in contemporary events.<sup>10</sup>

This report will explore the world that created *Nineteen Eighty-Four*
and the world it, in turn, has shaped. It will delve into the author's
harrowing personal experiences, the hidden meanings behind the novel's
symbols, and its journey across the globe. While the book feels
intensely relevant in the English-speaking world, its story is even more
profound in other cultures. For readers in countries like Poland, who
lived under the very systems Orwell warned against, the novel was not a
dystopian fantasy but a shockingly accurate documentary of their
reality.<sup>12</sup> Understanding these international perspectives
reveals the book's true, universal power. The Party in Oceania had to
force telescreens upon its citizens. In a twist of irony Orwell would
have surely appreciated, we buy our own, and we call it progress.

### Section 2: The Last Man in Europe: Forging a Nightmare

*Nineteen Eighty-Four* was not a sudden flash of dystopian imagination.
It was the culmination of a life spent witnessing and participating in
the great, violent struggles of the early 20th century.<sup>3</sup> The
novel’s bleakness is a direct reflection of the historical traumas that
shaped its author, Eric Blair—better known by his pen name, George
Orwell—and the grueling personal ordeal he endured while writing it. To
understand the book is to understand the man and the brutal world he
inhabited.

#### The Crucible of Experience

Three distinct periods of Orwell’s life forged the intellectual and
emotional raw material for his masterpiece.<sup>13</sup>

First was his time as a colonial policeman in Burma from 1922 to
1927.<sup>14</sup> Born in India into what he called the
"lower-upper-middle class," Orwell was educated at England's prestigious
Eton College but chose to join the Imperial Police instead of attending
university.<sup>3</sup> In Burma, he was tasked with enforcing the laws
of a political system he grew to despise.<sup>3</sup> This experience
gave him a unique, insider’s perspective on the mechanics of oppression
and instilled in him a lifelong hatred of authoritarianism and
imperialism, not from the position of the victim, but from the
uncomfortable vantage point of the enforcer.<sup>13</sup>

The second, and arguably most pivotal, experience was his time fighting
in the Spanish Civil War from 1936 to 1937.<sup>13</sup> Orwell traveled
to Spain to fight against Francisco Franco's fascists, joining the POUM
(Workers' Party of Marxist Unification) militia, a group independent of
Soviet control.<sup>14</sup> On the front lines in Aragon, he was shot
in the throat by a sniper and nearly killed.<sup>15</sup> Yet, the most
profound wound was not physical. In Barcelona, he witnessed a "civil war
within a civil war" as Soviet-backed communist factions turned on their
leftist rivals, including the POUM.<sup>15</sup> Orwell saw firsthand
how propaganda could systematically erase objective truth. He read
newspaper reports in London about great battles that never happened and
saw brave soldiers denounced as traitors in the press.<sup>15</sup> This
experience of seeing history manipulated in real-time was a foundational
trauma that directly inspired the novel's central theme: the idea that
"who controls the past controls the future".<sup>15</sup> It was in
Spain that Orwell learned that the greatest threat of totalitarianism
was not just its physical violence, but its assault on the very concept
of reality.<sup>18</sup>

The third formative experience was his work as a propagandist for the
BBC’s Eastern Service during World War II, from 1941 to
1943.<sup>14</sup> Working within what was effectively a
state-controlled media apparatus, he learned the art of crafting
messages designed to influence public opinion.<sup>21</sup> He admitted
in his diary that "All propaganda is lies, even when one is telling the
truth," and noted how one "rapidly becomes propaganda-minded and
develops a cunning one did not previously have".<sup>22</sup> This work
provided the direct inspiration for the Ministry of Truth, the novel's
propaganda wing where protagonist Winston Smith works.<sup>14</sup> Even
the dreaded Room 101, the final destination for thought-criminals, was
named after a tedious conference room at the BBC where Orwell was forced
to sit through mind-numbing meetings.<sup>22</sup>

#### A "Suicidal Project" on a Remote Island

By 1946, exhausted by journalism and physically frail, Orwell retreated
from London to the remote Scottish island of Jura to write the novel he
had been planning for years.<sup>1</sup> He sought a quiet, rustic life
at an abandoned farmhouse called Barnhill, hoping to become "a farmer
who wrote".<sup>24</sup> This desire for a self-sufficient existence,
surrounded by nature—growing his own food, fishing, and raising
animals—stood in stark contrast to the synthetic, decaying urban world
of Oceania he was about to create.<sup>1</sup>

The writing of *Nineteen Eighty-Four* was, as one observer noted, a
"suicidal project".<sup>24</sup> Orwell was desperately ill with
tuberculosis, a disease that had plagued him for years.<sup>16</sup> His
health deteriorated rapidly in the cold, damp climate of
Jura.<sup>25</sup> He suffered from fever, weight loss, and night
sweats, and was eventually hospitalized in 1947, where he underwent
"collapse therapy," a painful treatment designed to rest the lung by
collapsing it.<sup>25</sup> He often had to write propped up in bed,
finding it awkward to use a typewriter.<sup>25</sup> This profound
physical suffering is etched into the novel's pages. The descriptions of
Winston's frail body, his varicose ulcer, and the visceral details of
his torture in the Ministry of Love were drawn from Orwell's own
experience of bodily decay.<sup>25</sup> He himself told friends that
the book would have been less gloomy had he not been so ill while
writing it.<sup>26</sup>

Adding to this sense of a man battling hostile forces was a near-fatal
accident in 1947. While navigating the treacherous waters between Jura
and the neighboring island of Scarba, Orwell and his party, including
his young son Richard, were caught in the infamous Corryvreckan
whirlpool after their boat's motor fell off.<sup>28</sup> They were
swept away by the current and shipwrecked on a small, rocky island
before being rescued by a passing lobster boat.<sup>28</sup> This
dramatic brush with death only intensified the atmosphere of struggle
and survival that permeates the novel. The very act of writing was a
race against time, a battle waged by a man whose body was failing him,
isolated on a remote island, trying to leave one final, urgent warning
to the world.

#### Fact-Checking and Myth-Busting

Over the years, a number of myths have grown around the novel's creation
and meaning.

- Mind-Blown Moment: The Title Was Not Just a Flipped Date  
  The common story is that Orwell simply inverted the last two digits of
  the year he finished the manuscript, 1948, to get the title Nineteen
  Eighty-Four.2 While the connection to 1948 is intentional, the choice
  was more complex. Orwell's working title for the novel was  
  *The Last Man in Europe*, a name his publisher felt was too bleak and
  not commercial enough.<sup>2</sup> Earlier drafts of the novel were
  set in 1980 and then 1982 before he settled on 1984.<sup>23</sup> The
  final title was chosen by his publisher, Frederic Warburg, from the
  two options Orwell provided.<sup>2</sup>

- It Was a Warning, Not a Prophecy  
  Orwell repeatedly insisted that his book was not a prediction of the
  future.19 He stated it was a satire, intended to show the "perversions
  to which a centralised economy is liable" and to serve as a warning by
  exaggerating the totalitarian tendencies he saw in his own time,
  particularly in Stalinist Russia and Nazi Germany.30 The novel was a
  cautionary tale about what  
  *could* happen if these trends went unchecked, not what *would*
  happen.<sup>19</sup>

- The Hidden "Happy Ending"  
  The novel's final sentence, "He loved Big Brother," is one of the most
  devastating in all of literature, signifying Winston's complete
  psychological annihilation.32 However, many critics point to a subtle
  but profound sign of hope embedded in the book's structure: the
  Appendix, titled "The Principles of Newspeak".32 This essay analyzes
  the Party's official language from a historical perspective.
  Crucially, it is written in standard English (Oldspeak) and
  consistently uses the past tense, with phrases like "Newspeak  
  *was* the official language of Oceania" and "It *was* expected that
  Newspeak would have finally superseded Oldspeak".<sup>32</sup> This
  scholarly, after-the-fact analysis strongly implies that the world of
  Big Brother did not last forever. At some point after the year 1984,
  the Party fell, and rational, objective language was restored. This
  suggests that the totalitarian project, for all its terrifying power,
  was ultimately unsustainable and doomed to fail.<sup>32</sup>

## Part II: Deconstructing Oceania: Symbols, Language, and Control

### Section 3: The Architecture of Oppression: Symbolism and Meaning

George Orwell built the world of *Nineteen Eighty-Four* not just with
plot and character, but with a powerful and resonant set of symbols.
These recurring images and concepts are the building blocks of Oceania's
oppressive reality. They function as instruments of the Party's control,
but for the protagonist, Winston Smith, they also become focal points
for his doomed rebellion. Understanding these symbols is key to
unlocking the novel's deeper meanings about power, memory, and humanity.

#### Big Brother: The Face of the Party

The most pervasive symbol in the novel is the face of Big Brother, the
black-mustachioed man whose posters are plastered everywhere, bearing
the caption "BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU".<sup>33</sup> Big Brother is
the personification of the Party, a figure designed to inspire a mixture
of love, fear, and reverence that would be difficult to feel towards a
faceless organization.<sup>34</sup> Winston can never determine if Big
Brother is a real person or a historical figure who never existed; in a
sense, it does not matter.<sup>33</sup> He is a symbol of the Party's
omniscience and its patriarchal, protective-yet-threatening authority.
Historically, the image was modeled on totalitarian leaders like Joseph
Stalin, whose cult of personality was a central feature of Soviet
rule.<sup>35</sup> Big Brother represents the ultimate vagueness of
power; he is the face of a system whose true rulers remain unknown and
whose motivations are deliberately obscured.<sup>33</sup>

#### The Glass Paperweight: A Fragile Past

In a junk shop in the prole district, Winston buys a heavy glass
paperweight with a tiny piece of pink coral embedded in its
center.<sup>33</sup> This object becomes a potent symbol of his attempt
to reconnect with the past—a world of beauty, history, and objective
reality that the Party has tried to erase.<sup>34</sup> The paperweight
is a tangible, useless, and beautiful artifact from another time, making
it a form of "thoughtcrime" in itself. For Winston, the clear glass
represents the bubble of the life he and his lover, Julia, have created
for themselves, and the coral is their relationship, "fixed in a sort of
eternity at the heart of the crystal".<sup>36</sup> The symbol's tragic
conclusion comes when the Thought Police raid their room. An officer
smashes the paperweight on the floor, and Winston is struck by how small
the piece of coral is.<sup>33</sup> The shattering of the paperweight
signifies the destruction of Winston and Julia's private world and the
brutal truth that the past offers no sanctuary from the power of the
Party.<sup>33</sup>

#### Room 101: The Personal Nightmare

The most feared destination in Oceania is Room 101, located deep within
the Ministry of Love. Its horror lies in its specificity: it contains
"the worst thing in the world".<sup>34</sup> This "worst thing" is
different for every individual, tailored to their deepest, most primal
fear. For Winston, it is rats.<sup>37</sup> Room 101 symbolizes the
Party's ultimate form of psychological control. It demonstrates that the
regime understands its subjects so intimately that it can weaponize the
very core of their identity against them. The goal is not merely to
inflict pain, but to shatter a person's spirit by forcing them to betray
their most profound loyalties and loves. By confronting Winston with his
worst fear and making him scream "Do it to Julia!", the Party severs his
last human connection and achieves its goal of breaking him
completely.<sup>34</sup>

- Fun Fact: The Real Room 101  
  The name "Room 101" was not a random invention. It was inspired by a
  real conference room at the BBC's Broadcasting House where Orwell
  worked during World War II. He was forced to endure many long and
  tedious meetings in this room, which he came to associate with a
  particular kind of soul-crushing bureaucracy.22

#### The Golden Country: A Lost Eden

Throughout the novel, Winston has a recurring dream of a beautiful,
sunlit landscape he calls the "Golden Country".<sup>36</sup> It is an
idyllic, pastoral world with elm trees, a clear stream, and a sense of
profound peace. In this dream, Julia appears, tearing off her clothes in
a gesture of magnificent rebellion.<sup>36</sup> The Golden Country
represents everything that the world of Oceania is not: nature, beauty,
freedom, and unrestrained sexuality. It is a symbol of a lost,
pre-totalitarian world, a kind of "ancestral memory" that Winston feels
but cannot fully access.<sup>38</sup> It is the subconscious repository
of human desires that the Party has tried to extinguish. When Winston
and Julia finally make love for the first time, it is in a similar
clearing in the woods, a real-world manifestation of his dream,
suggesting that these natural human instincts can, however briefly, find
expression even in the most oppressive of worlds.<sup>36</sup>

#### Cross-Cultural Interpretations

The power of these symbols often shifts depending on the cultural
context of the reader.

- The figure of a single, all-powerful leader like **Big Brother**
  resonates differently in nations with a history of monarchical rule,
  imperial cults, or 20th-century personality cults, such as Stalin's
  Soviet Union or Mao's China. For readers from these backgrounds, Big
  Brother is not an abstract symbol but a direct historical parallel.

- The destruction of historical artifacts, symbolized by the **shattered
  paperweight** and the altered picture of St. Clement's Church, carries
  a particular weight in countries that have endured the deliberate
  erasure of their cultural heritage. For a Polish reader, this might
  evoke the systematic destruction of Warsaw during World War II; for a
  Chinese reader, it could recall the destruction of temples and
  artifacts during the Cultural Revolution. In these contexts, the loss
  of a simple object becomes a powerful metaphor for national trauma.

The very tools the Party uses for control become, for Winston, the
catalysts for his rebellion. The omnipresent telescreen, a symbol of
surveillance, creates the necessity for the small, hidden alcove where
Winston can begin his diary.<sup>33</sup> The constant falsification of
records at the Ministry of Truth, a tool of oppression, is what gives
Winston a unique insight into the

*process* of manipulation, fueling his desperate search for objective
reality.<sup>2</sup> Even the proles, who symbolize the successfully
pacified masses, become for Winston the only symbol of hope for a future
revolution.<sup>30</sup> This creates a profound and tragic irony: the
system of control is so total that it inadvertently generates the means
and motivation for its own opposition, even if that opposition is
ultimately crushed. The narrative is therefore more complex than a
simple fable of oppression; it is an exploration of how the architecture
of power inevitably creates the spaces, however small, for dissent.

### Section 4: The Ultimate Weapon: Newspeak and the Politics of Language

While the telescreens and the Thought Police are terrifying instruments
of control, the Party's most ambitious and insidious project is its
attack on language itself. In *Nineteen Eighty-Four*, Orwell introduces
the concept of "Newspeak," a language engineered not just to control
what people say, but to fundamentally limit what they can
*think*.<sup>34</sup> This linguistic engineering, combined with the
psychological technique of "doublethink," represents the ultimate form
of totalitarian power: the colonization of the human mind.

#### The Principles of Newspeak

The goal of Newspeak is to narrow the range of thought.<sup>39</sup> As
Winston's colleague Syme, a philologist working on the new Newspeak
dictionary, explains, "In the end we shall make thoughtcrime literally
impossible, because there will be no words in which to express
it".<sup>39</sup> The process involves two main strategies: the
elimination of "unnecessary" words and the stripping of nuance from
those that remain.

Synonyms and antonyms are destroyed. Why have a word like "bad" when you
can simply say "ungood"? For a stronger meaning, one doesn't need words
like "excellent" or "splendid"; "plusgood" or "doubleplusgood" will
suffice.<sup>40</sup> Words with subversive or complex meanings, like
"freedom," "honor," "justice," and "science," are either eliminated or
redefined to have a single, Party-approved meaning. The result is a
language that is brutally efficient for Party business but incapable of
expressing heresy, ambiguity, or philosophical inquiry.<sup>29</sup>
This idea was a direct extension of Orwell's arguments in his famous
1946 essay, "Politics and the English Language," where he condemned the
use of vague, pretentious, and dishonest jargon by politicians to
obscure truth and conceal violence.<sup>29</sup> Newspeak is the
logical, terrifying endpoint of this trend.

#### Doublethink: The Art of Holding Contradictions

To navigate the constantly shifting reality of Oceania, Party members
must master the psychological discipline of "doublethink." Orwell
defines this as "the power of holding two contradictory beliefs in one's
mind simultaneously, and accepting both of them".<sup>30</sup> It is a
form of controlled insanity, a willed suspension of logic.

The Party's three official slogans are the most potent examples of
doublethink in action <sup>43</sup>:

- **WAR IS PEACE:** The state of perpetual, limited warfare with the
  other superstates keeps the domestic population in a state of
  patriotic fervor and prevents them from becoming too comfortable, thus
  preserving the Party's power. A permanent peace would be a threat to
  the social order.<sup>20</sup>

- **FREEDOM IS SLAVERY:** The individual who is free is doomed to fail
  and die. Only by completely submitting to the collective will of the
  Party can a person become powerful and immortal.<sup>20</sup>

- **IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH:** The ignorance of the masses, and their
  inability to recognize the contradictions and lies of the Party, is
  what gives the regime its unshakeable strength.<sup>20</sup>

Doublethink allows a Party member to know that the Ministry of Truth is
falsifying a historical record, while simultaneously believing that the
new, falsified record is the absolute truth. It requires one to forget
that one has forgotten, and then to forget the act of forgetting itself.

#### The Destruction of History

The linguistic project of Newspeak and the psychological trick of
doublethink are inextricably linked to the physical act of destroying
the past. At his job in the Ministry of Truth, Winston's task is to
"rectify" old newspaper articles, photographs, and books, making them
conform to the Party's current political line.<sup>2</sup> When an
official falls out of favor and becomes an "unperson," every record of
their existence is systematically purged. This continuous alteration of
the past ensures that the Party is infallible; its predictions are
always correct, and its policies are always successful.<sup>20</sup> As
the slogan goes, "Who controls the past controls the future: who
controls the present controls the past".<sup>20</sup> This process
creates an "endless present" in which history has ceased to exist,
leaving citizens with no standard against which to judge the Party's
claims.<sup>20</sup>

The Party’s ultimate goal is to create a closed ideological system, a
state of intellectual and linguistic entropy where no new or rebellious
thoughts can enter, and all existing concepts eventually decay into
Party-approved slogans. However, the novel itself contains a clue that
this project was ultimately a failure. The Appendix, "The Principles of
Newspeak," is written in standard English and describes Newspeak in the
past tense, as a historical artifact.<sup>32</sup> This scholarly
post-mortem implies that the regime of Big Brother eventually collapsed
and that Oldspeak—the language of nuance, complexity, and
freedom—survived. This suggests that language, as a living, evolving
system, possesses an inherent resistance to total control. The Party's
attempt to build a perfect prison for the mind was, in the long run,
impossible. This is perhaps the most profound and overlooked glimmer of
hope in Orwell's dark vision.

## Part III: The Book That Crossed Borders

### Section 5: A Global Phenomenon: Translation and Reception

When *Nineteen Eighty-Four* was published in London and New York in June
1949, it was an immediate sensation.<sup>1</sup> Critics recognized it
as a terrifyingly powerful political statement, though some debated
whether its artistic merits matched its ideological force.<sup>30</sup>
In the English-speaking world, it was read primarily as a cautionary
tale, a warning against the twin menaces of Nazism and, more pointedly,
Stalinism.<sup>2</sup> But as the novel crossed borders and languages,
its meaning was refracted through the lens of different cultures and
political realities. The book's international journey reveals how a
single text can become a universal symbol while holding intensely local
meanings. It acted as a cultural mirror, reflecting the anxieties,
taboos, and power structures of each nation that received it.

#### Country Spotlights

- **Russia/Soviet Union:** In the state that served as its primary
  model, *Nineteen Eighty-Four* was officially banned as "anti-Soviet"
  propaganda.<sup>45</sup> For decades, it existed only as a dangerous,
  underground text, circulated secretly in typewritten  
  *samizdat* copies, where possession could lead to
  imprisonment.<sup>4</sup> For the few dissidents who read it, the
  experience was revelatory. They were astounded that a British writer
  who had never set foot in the USSR could capture their reality with
  such precision.<sup>47</sup> For them, the book was not a dystopian
  fantasy; it was a work of stark realism.<sup>47</sup> The novel was
  not officially published until 1988, during Mikhail Gorbachev's era
  of  
  *glasnost*.<sup>45</sup> In the 21st century, its relevance has surged
  again in Vladimir Putin's Russia. In 2022, following the invasion of
  Ukraine, it became the top-selling e-book in the country, read by
  citizens alarmed by the parallels to their own government's propaganda
  and repression.<sup>48</sup> In a perfect example of doublethink,
  Russian state officials have also co-opted the term "Orwellian" to
  describe what they claim is the "total disinformation" of Western
  media.<sup>48</sup>

- **Germany:** The novel's reception in post-war Germany was starkly
  divided by the Iron Curtain. In the German Democratic Republic (East
  Germany), the book was banned, and citizens were arrested for reading
  or distributing it.<sup>49</sup> For those living under the
  surveillance of the Stasi secret police, the world of Big Brother was
  a direct metaphor for their daily lives.<sup>50</sup> In West Germany,
  however, the novel was embraced and became a staple in school
  curricula.<sup>49</sup> It was taught as a crucial warning against
  totalitarianism, drawing parallels not only to Soviet communism but
  also to the nation's own recent Nazi past.

- **Spain:** The first Spanish translation, undertaken by Rafael Vázquez
  Zamora in 1952, provides a stark case study in state
  censorship.<sup>51</sup> Published under the authoritarian regime of
  Francisco Franco, the text was systematically purged of content deemed
  subversive.<sup>52</sup> Passages dealing with sexual freedom, any
  criticism of the Catholic Church (particularly references to the
  Spanish Inquisition), and direct attacks on authoritarianism were
  simply deleted.<sup>52</sup> The first Spanish edition is therefore a
  cultural artifact in its own right, a book about totalitarianism that
  was itself mutilated by a totalitarian censor. A complete, uncensored
  version did not appear in Spanish until 1984.<sup>54</sup>

- **China:** The novel's journey into the Sinophone world was also
  shaped by the Cold War. The first Chinese translations appeared in
  Taiwan and Hong Kong in the 1950s, where the book was read as a
  straightforward anti-communist allegory.<sup>55</sup> It was not
  officially published in mainland China until the late 1980s, during a
  period of relative openness.<sup>55</sup> Today, the book occupies a
  complex and paradoxical space. It is widely available and read, often
  by those critical of state power, even as the Chinese government
  itself employs some of the most advanced "Orwellian" systems of mass
  surveillance and information control in the world.

- **Japan:** In Japan, the novel has had a profound literary influence,
  most famously inspiring the title and themes of Haruki Murakami's
  globally bestselling 2009-2010 trilogy, *1Q84*.<sup>57</sup> The
  phonetic similarity of "Q" and "nine" in Japanese makes the title a
  direct homage, and Murakami's work explores similar themes of a
  parallel reality, cult-like organizations, and the struggle for
  individual identity against inscrutable, powerful forces.

- **The Arab World:** Translating *Nineteen Eighty-Four* into Arabic has
  presented unique challenges due to both political and cultural
  sensitivities.<sup>58</sup> Translators have struggled with key
  concepts. The term "Big Brother" (<span dir="rtl">الكبري االخ</span>),
  for instance, carries positive connotations of a protective older
  sibling in Arabic, completely losing Orwell's satirical and menacing
  intent.<sup>58</sup> Sexual themes are also highly taboo, leading to
  euphemistic or altered translations.<sup>58</sup> The book's reception
  took a dramatic turn in Egypt in 2014 when authorities arrested
  college students for buying or discussing the novel.<sup>58</sup> This
  real-life enactment of "thoughtcrime" ironically caused sales of the
  book to skyrocket across the Middle East as people grew aware of the
  government's fear of its message.<sup>58</sup>

- **Portugal & Brazil:** The first translation into Portuguese was
  published in Portugal in 1955.<sup>59</sup> A well-regarded Brazilian
  Portuguese translation followed much later, in 2009.<sup>59</sup> In
  Brazil, the novel's cultural reception is deeply intertwined with
  Terry Gilliam's iconic 1985 film  
  *Brazil*.<sup>60</sup> Though not a direct adaptation, the film is
  widely seen by critics as a satirical, darkly humorous, and Kafkaesque
  response to Orwell's vision, critiquing not just totalitarianism but
  also the soul-crushing nature of modern bureaucracy.<sup>61</sup>

#### A Global Timeline of a Dangerous Idea

The spread of *Nineteen Eighty-Four* across the globe can be tracked
through its translations, each one a milestone in the book's journey
from a British novel to a universal warning.

| **Table 1: Chronology of Key International Translations of *Nineteen Eighty-Four*** |  |  |  |  |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| **Language** | **Year of First Known Translation** | **Translator(s)** | **Publisher / Medium** | **Cultural Context / Notes** |
| Polish | 1949 | Jan Lechoń | Voice of America (Radio) | Émigré production; predates the first print edition by four years. A key Cold War artifact.<sup>64</sup> |
| Italian | 1950 | Gabriele Baldini | Mondadori | One of the earliest translations, published shortly after the original.<sup>65</sup> |
| Chinese | 1950, 1953 | Niu Xianzhong | Taiwan (Radio adaptation, then book) | First appeared in the anti-communist sphere; mainland publication delayed until the 1980s.<sup>55</sup> |
| Spanish | 1952 | Rafael Vázquez Zamora | Ediciones Destino | Heavily censored under the Franco regime, removing political, religious, and sexual content.<sup>51</sup> |
| Polish | 1953 | Juliusz Mieroszewski | Instytut Literacki (Paris) | The first Polish *print* edition, published by a key émigré cultural institution and smuggled into Poland.<sup>66</sup> |
| Portuguese (Portugal) | 1955 | Paulo de Santa-Rita | Ulisseia | First translation for the Lusophone world.<sup>59</sup> |
| Russian | 1957 | V. Andreev & N. Vitov (pseudonyms) | Possev-Verlag (Frankfurt) | First print edition, published by an anti-Soviet émigré group and subsidized by Orwell's widow.<sup>68</sup> |
| Arabic | 2006 (analyzed) | Anwar Al-Shami | N/A | Translation faced significant cultural and political challenges, with key terms losing their satirical edge.<sup>58</sup> |
| Brazilian Portuguese | 2009 | Heloisa Jahn, Alexandre Hubner | Companhia das Letras | A more recent, highly regarded translation for the Brazilian market.<sup>59</sup> |

### Section 6: SPECIAL FOCUS: Orwell, Our Contemporary—***Rok 1984*** in Poland

Nowhere has *Nineteen Eighty-Four* resonated more deeply or been woven
more tightly into the fabric of national identity than in Poland. For
Polish readers, the novel is not merely a work of speculative fiction;
it is a work of historical realism, a cultural touchstone that gave
language to a lived reality. While the Western reading of the book has
always focused on the warning—"Don't let this happen"—the Polish reading
has been one of profound and painful recognition: "This is what happened
to us."

#### A History of Resistance: The Polish Context

To understand the novel's unique power in Poland, one must first
understand the historical trauma that made the nation so receptive to
its message. Poland's modern history is a story of fighting for survival
against powerful, oppressive neighbors. After being partitioned and
erased from the map for 123 years, Poland regained independence in 1918
only to be invaded and occupied again in 1939, this time by both Nazi
Germany and the Soviet Union.<sup>69</sup> The war was followed not by
liberation, but by the imposition of a Soviet-backed communist regime,
the Polish People's Republic (PRL), which would rule for over four
decades.<sup>72</sup> This history created a society intimately familiar
with themes of lost sovereignty, foreign domination, state-sponsored
lies (like the decades-long denial of Soviet responsibility for the
Katyn massacre), and the necessity of underground
resistance.<sup>69</sup> The world of Oceania, with its rewritten
history and omnipresent Party, did not need to be imagined by Poles; it
could be recognized.

#### The Secret Premiere and the Émigré Weapon

The novel's relationship with Poland began almost immediately after its
publication, not within Poland itself, but from the outside, as a weapon
in the burgeoning Cold War. In a little-known but crucial historical
event, the very first Polish-language version of *Nineteen Eighty-Four*
was not a book, but a radio adaptation. It was translated by the exiled
poet Jan Lechoń and broadcast into Poland in November 1949 by the
American radio station, the Voice of America.<sup>64</sup> This
broadcast, which predated the first print edition by four years,
established the novel's role as a tool of cultural and ideological
resistance from its inception.<sup>64</sup>

The first Polish *print* edition, titled *Rok 1984*, was published in
1953.<sup>66</sup> It was translated by the brilliant political
journalist Juliusz Mieroszewski and issued not in Warsaw, but in Paris,
by the Instytut Literacki.<sup>66</sup> This "Literary Institute," which
also published the influential journal

*Kultura*, was the intellectual heart of the Polish government-in-exile
and a vital center for preserving free Polish thought.<sup>75</sup>
Copies of this Paris edition were considered contraband in the PRL and
were smuggled across the Iron Curtain, passed from hand to hand by those
brave enough to possess them.<sup>66</sup>

#### The Lifeblood of the Underground: ***Drugi Obieg*** and Solidarność

Inside Poland, the novel was officially unmentionable. Orwell was an
"unperson" in the state-controlled media and publishing
houses.<sup>78</sup> But in the 1970s and 1980s, a massive underground
publishing movement known as

*drugi obieg* (the second circulation) flourished.<sup>66</sup> Using
makeshift printing presses, often hidden in basements and attics, this
network produced thousands of uncensored books, journals, and pamphlets.

Within this clandestine world, *Rok 1984* became a phenomenon. It was
one of the most popular and frequently reprinted books of the *drugi
obieg*, a foundational text for the growing anti-communist
opposition.<sup>12</sup> Its true moment of cultural ascendancy came
with the rise of the Solidarność (Solidarity) trade union movement in
the 1980s.<sup>85</sup> For Solidarity activists, Orwell's novel was
more than a book; it was a manual for understanding the system they were
fighting against. The movement adopted Orwell's imagery and language as
its own. Clandestine Solidarity workshops produced calendars, posters,
and even postage stamps featuring Orwell's face and quotes from the
novel.<sup>85</sup> In Jaruzelski's Poland, under martial law, the mere
possession of a

*Rok 1984* calendar or stamp was a political crime that could lead to
arrest and a lengthy prison sentence.<sup>85</sup>

#### From Banned Book to School Staple

The novel's journey from forbidden fruit to official canon mirrors
Poland's own path to freedom. After decades of being banned, the first
official, state-sanctioned edition of *Rok 1984* was finally published
in 1988, a year before the semi-free elections that would spell the end
of communist rule in Poland.<sup>45</sup>

Today, the book's status is completely transformed. *Rok 1984* is now a
*lektura obowiązkowa*—compulsory reading—in the Polish high school
curriculum.<sup>86</sup> Its themes are considered essential for
understanding not only 20th-century history but also the enduring
threats to freedom. The novel is a regular feature on the Matura,
Poland's final high school exam. The official list of oral exam
questions includes topics that go to the heart of the Polish experience
with the book, such as "Newspeak as a way to limit human freedom,"
"Interpersonal relations in the reality of a totalitarian state," and
"How to preserve freedom in a totalitarian state?".<sup>90</sup>

#### The Polish Orwell: Contemporary Resonances

Orwell's influence in Poland extends far beyond the classroom. It is
deeply embedded in the nation's popular culture.

- **Music as Rebellion:** The bleak atmosphere of martial law in the
  1980s gave rise to a powerful Polish post-punk and cold wave music
  scene. The year 1984 itself became a symbol of the oppressive
  reality.<sup>93</sup> Bands like Siekiera, from the provincial city of
  Puławy, and the Rzeszów-based band  
  **1984** channeled the novel's dark, rebellious energy into their
  music, creating a soundtrack for a generation that felt they were
  living inside Orwell's world.<sup>93</sup>

- **Modern Reception:** In the 21st century, the book continues to be a
  vital part of Polish cultural conversation. On Lubimyczytać.pl,
  Poland's most popular book review website, *Rok 1984* holds an
  exceptionally high average rating of 8.5/10 from over 45,000 users—the
  highest score among the site's 20 most popular books.<sup>95</sup>
  Online forums and comment sections show Polish readers constantly
  connecting the novel's themes of surveillance and propaganda to
  contemporary political events, both in Poland and
  globally.<sup>95</sup>

- **Modern Adaptations:** The novel continues to inspire new artistic
  interpretations. A recent example is the "Rok 1984 – Rockowy Teatr"
  (Rock Theatre) production in the city of Łódź, a powerful performance
  that combines dramatic theatre with live rock music to express the
  novel's enduring spirit of resistance.<sup>98</sup>

For Poles, the novel's power lies in its validation of a traumatic past.
The techniques of control described in the book—the rewriting of
history, the constant surveillance by secret police, the propagandistic
language of the Party, the show trials, the creation of "unpersons"—were
not fictional devices. They were the lived reality of life under
communism. This transforms *Nineteen Eighty-Four* from a political
allegory into a national text, a story that helped a nation understand
its own suffering and articulate its struggle for freedom. Its place in
the school curriculum is not just about literary appreciation; it is an
act of cultural memory, ensuring that the lessons of the 20th century
are not forgotten.

## Part IV: The Afterlife of a Masterpiece

### Section 7: From Page to Screen and Beyond: Adaptations in Media

The enduring power of *Nineteen Eighty-Four* is evident in its vast and
varied afterlife across different media. Each adaptation serves as a
cultural timestamp, reinterpreting Orwell's vision through the lens of
its own era's technological anxieties and political fears. From the
early days of television to the interactive world of video games, the
story of Winston Smith's rebellion has been told and retold, proving its
remarkable capacity to evolve while retaining its core warning.

#### Film Adaptations: Visions of Dystopia

The novel has been adapted for the cinema multiple times, with two
versions standing out.

- The first feature film was released in **1956**, directed by Michael
  Anderson and starring Edmond O'Brien as Winston.<sup>99</sup> This
  version is notable for its Cold War context and for making certain
  changes to the novel, such as renaming O'Brien to
  "O'Connor".<sup>99</sup>

- The most iconic film adaptation is Michael Radford's ***Nineteen
  Eighty-Four***, released, fittingly, in **1984**.<sup>99</sup>
  Starring John Hurt in a definitive performance as Winston Smith and
  Richard Burton in his final role as the chilling O'Brien, the film is
  celebrated for its bleak, gritty aesthetic and its faithful adherence
  to the novel's oppressive tone.<sup>99</sup> Radford went to great
  lengths to capture the novel's atmosphere, filming many scenes on the
  exact dates mentioned in Winston's diary.<sup>99</sup>

- More recently, a **2023 Russian-language adaptation** was released,
  marking the first time the novel has been adapted for film in
  Russia.<sup>99</sup> Additionally, a Hollywood reboot helmed by
  director Paul Greengrass has been in development for years, though it
  has been postponed due to the difficulty of adapting the "bloody
  perfect" source material to a world where surveillance technology
  evolves so rapidly.<sup>99</sup>

#### Television: The Version That Shocked a Nation

Perhaps the most impactful adaptation was one of the earliest: the
**1954 BBC live television production**, written by Nigel Kneale and
directed by Rudolph Cartier.<sup>100</sup> Starring Peter Cushing as
Winston, this broadcast was a national event that terrified a British
public still new to the medium of television.<sup>100</sup> The play's
"horrific" content, particularly the infamous Room 101 scene with rats,
caused a public outcry. Newspapers reported that viewers had fainted
from shock, and questions were raised in Parliament about the BBC's
decision to air such subversive material.<sup>100</sup> The controversy
was so intense that the BBC, in a bold move, restaged and rebroadcast
the play live just four days later to an even larger
audience.<sup>100</sup> The recording of this second performance
survives, making it one of the earliest and most important preserved
dramas in British television history.<sup>100</sup>

#### On Stage and On Air

The novel's dramatic structure has made it a natural fit for the stage
and radio.

- **Theatre:** Numerous stage adaptations exist, with versions by Robert
  Owens, Wilton E. Hall Jr., and William A. Miles Jr., as well as a more
  recent one by Michael Gene Sullivan, being particularly popular in
  high school, college, and community theatre circuits.<sup>102</sup>
  These productions often emphasize the novel's intense psychological
  drama and its themes of interrogation and confession.<sup>103</sup>

- **Radio:** The story has been dramatized for radio audiences around
  the world. Major productions include a 1953 broadcast by NBC's
  *Theatre Guild on the Air* in the US, starring Richard Widmark as
  Winston <sup>104</sup>, and several adaptations by the BBC in the UK
  over the decades.<sup>99</sup>

#### Modern Visual Narratives

In the 21st century, the novel continues to be adapted into new and
interactive formats, reflecting the anxieties of the digital age.

- **Graphic Novels:** In 2021, a full-length graphic novel adaptation
  illustrated by Brazilian artist Fido Nesti was published
  internationally.<sup>105</sup> Its stark, atmospheric visuals offer a
  powerful new way to experience the claustrophobia and dread of
  Oceania, making the story accessible to a new generation of readers
  accustomed to visual narratives.<sup>105</sup>

- **Video Games:** A first-person survival adventure game titled *1984*
  is currently in development and listed on the gaming platform
  Steam.<sup>107</sup> The game promises to allow players to step into
  the role of Winston Smith, forcing them to make choices about work,
  relationships, and rebellion while navigating the constant threat of
  the Thought Police.<sup>108</sup> This shift from passive viewing to
  active participation represents a significant evolution in how
  audiences can engage with the dystopia, reflecting a modern
  preoccupation with player agency and the moral consequences of choice
  within complex digital systems.

- **Digital Culture:** Beyond formal adaptations, *Nineteen Eighty-Four*
  thrives in the digital ecosystem. YouTube is home to countless video
  essays and chapter-by-chapter summaries from educational channels like
  Course Hero and literary analysts like Jeddle, which dissect the
  novel's themes for students and enthusiasts.<sup>109</sup> The
  \#BookTok community on TikTok and BookTube reviewers on YouTube ensure
  that the novel remains a central part of the online literary
  conversation.<sup>9</sup>

The history of these adaptations reveals a fascinating pattern. The 1954
BBC play resonated with a society grappling with the new, intrusive
power of broadcast television. The 1984 film captured the anxieties of
the Cold War and the dawn of the computer age. The forthcoming video
game speaks to a generation immersed in interactive digital worlds where
every action is tracked and has consequences. The core text remains
unchanged, but the way it is retold consistently reflects the specific
technological fears of the moment.

### Section 8: "Big Brother is Watching You": Quotes That Became Culture

Few novels have injected so much of their language into the public
consciousness as *Nineteen Eighty-Four*. Its phrases and slogans have
transcended the page to become intellectual shorthand for concepts of
power, control, and truth. These quotes are not just memorable lines;
they are the ideological pillars of Oceania and the desperate whispers
of rebellion against it.

#### The Official Slogans and Defining Lines

The novel's most famous quotes are often the Party's own propaganda,
chilling in their paradoxical simplicity.

- **"WAR IS PEACE, FREEDOM IS SLAVERY, IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH."**
  <sup>43</sup> This trio of slogans, inscribed on the Ministry of
  Truth, is the ultimate expression of doublethink. Each phrase is a
  direct contradiction, yet within the Party's logic, they are profound
  truths that underpin the stability of the regime.<sup>20</sup>

- **"Who controls the past controls the future. Who controls the present
  controls the past."** <sup>20</sup> This slogan encapsulates the
  Party's core philosophy of power. By constantly rewriting history, the
  Party eliminates any basis for comparison or dissent, ensuring its
  control over the present and its vision for the future.<sup>20</sup>

- **"If you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a
  human face—for ever."** <sup>39</sup> This is O'Brien's brutal, honest
  explanation of the Party's motivation. It rejects any pretense of
  working for the "good of the people." The goal is not a means to an
  end; the goal is simply power, expressed through persecution and
  torture, for its own sake.<sup>112</sup>

- **"Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four. If that
  is granted, all else follows."** <sup>39</sup> This is Winston's
  personal definition of liberty. It is not about grand political
  gestures, but about the right to recognize and state objective
  reality, even when the most powerful forces insist that  
  2+2=5. The Party's ability to psychologically break Winston is
  complete when he finally accepts their false arithmetic.<sup>20</sup>

#### The Most Highlighted Passages

Data from reader platforms like Goodreads reveals which lines resonate
most deeply with a modern audience. Beyond the famous political slogans,
the most-liked quote is often a quiet, poignant reflection on human
connection:

- **"Perhaps one did not want to be loved so much as to be
  understood."** <sup>42</sup> This line, with over 16,000 likes on
  Goodreads, speaks to the profound loneliness and alienation at the
  heart of the novel and connects with a universal human desire for
  empathy and recognition.<sup>112</sup>

#### WARNING: Common Misquotes

The novel's immense cultural footprint has led to many powerful-sounding
quotes being falsely attributed to Orwell. It is a testament to his
style that these forgeries sound plausible, but they are not his words.

- **"In a time of universal deceit, telling the truth is a revolutionary
  act."** This is perhaps the most famous "Orwell" quote he never wrote.
  Its exact origin is uncertain, but it was first mistakenly attributed
  to him in a 1982 book.<sup>113</sup>

- **"The people will not revolt. They will not look up from their
  screens long enough to notice what's happening."** This line perfectly
  captures modern anxieties about digital distraction, but it comes from
  the 2014 stage adaptation of the novel, not the book
  itself.<sup>113</sup>

- **"The war is not meant to be won, it is meant to be continuous."**
  This is a direct quote, but from the screenplay of the 1984 film
  adaptation starring John Hurt. It concisely summarizes a concept from
  the book, but the phrasing is not Orwell's.<sup>113</sup>

- **"The further a society drifts from the truth, the more it will hate
  those who speak it."** This quote was coined in 2009 by writer Selwyn
  Duke.<sup>113</sup>

These misquotes often simplify the novel's complex ideas into easily
digestible slogans, demonstrating how even a book about the dangers of
misinformation can itself become a victim of it in the digital age.

### Section 9: Reading ***Nineteen Eighty-Four*** Today: Identity and New Perspectives

As society evolves, so too does our understanding of classic literature.
Reading *Nineteen Eighty-Four* in the 21st century means engaging with
its text through contemporary lenses of identity, social justice, and
environmentalism. These new perspectives reveal the novel's blind spots
and complexities, while also highlighting its continued relevance in
ways Orwell himself may never have anticipated.

#### Representation and Identity

- **Feminist Critiques:** A significant contemporary critique of the
  novel focuses on its portrayal of female characters. Both of the main
  women in Winston's life, his wife Katharine and his lover Julia, are
  often seen as one-dimensional and defined primarily through their
  relationship to sex and to Winston.<sup>116</sup> Katharine is
  depicted as a frigid, mindless Party drone, "the human soundtrack,"
  whose only purpose is procreation.<sup>118</sup> Julia, while a rebel,
  is often portrayed as being driven by simple, apolitical hedonism,
  interested in sex and personal pleasure rather than a deep ideological
  opposition to the Party.<sup>116</sup> Critics argue that both women
  are objectified through Winston's male gaze, serving more as symbols
  (conformity vs. rebellion) than as fully realized
  individuals.<sup>117</sup>

- **LGBTQ+ Readings:** Queer interpretations of the novel find fertile
  ground in the Party's obsession with controlling and eradicating the
  sex instinct for any purpose other than procreation.<sup>119</sup> The
  Party's war on pleasure and private loyalties is, by extension, a war
  on any form of non-procreative or non-sanctioned sexuality. Some
  analyses point to the intense, complex, and arguably homoerotic
  undertones in the relationship between Winston and his tormentor,
  O'Brien.<sup>119</sup> Winston's admiration for O'Brien's intellect
  and power, combined with their profound and intimate connection in the
  Ministry of Love, can be read as a twisted form of desire, one that
  the Party ultimately manipulates to break him.<sup>119</sup> In this
  reading, any form of sexual rebellion, whether heterosexual or
  otherwise, becomes a political act of defiance.<sup>119</sup>

- **Race and Ethnicity:** The novel is conspicuously lacking in racial
  diversity. As noted in the foreword to the 75th-anniversary edition,
  there is a near-total absence of non-white characters, which can make
  it difficult for some modern readers to find a point of
  connection.<sup>120</sup> This reflects the largely white,
  monocultural Britain of the 1940s in which Orwell was
  writing.<sup>120</sup> However, a look at the surviving manuscript
  reveals that Orwell self-censored certain passages "on grounds of
  possible racial prejudice or taste," including a scene involving the
  lynching of a Black woman in a propaganda film.<sup>41</sup> This
  suggests a more complex, if unresolved, engagement with race than the
  final text might indicate.

- **Disability and Mental Health:** The novel offers a profound
  exploration of both physical and psychological suffering. Winston's
  varicose ulcer is a constant, nagging symbol of his physical decay and
  the grimness of his environment.<sup>121</sup> More significantly, the
  entire narrative is a deep dive into the psychology of trauma,
  paranoia, and gaslighting. The Party does not just punish dissent; it
  defines it as a form of mental illness. O'Brien tells Winston, "You
  are mentally deranged," and presents his torture as a form of
  "curing".<sup>122</sup> The novel can be read as a powerful depiction
  of how a totalitarian state systematically induces mental
  illness—through constant surveillance, the destruction of reality, and
  extreme trauma—as its primary method of social control.<sup>125</sup>

#### Contemporary Interpretations

- **Ecocritical Readings:** An environmental or ecocritical perspective
  reveals the world of Oceania as profoundly anti-natural.<sup>129</sup>
  It is a world of "decaying, dingy cities" that smell of "boiled
  cabbage and bad lavatories".<sup>38</sup> Food and drink are synthetic
  and unsatisfying ("Victory Gin," "Victory Coffee"). In contrast, the
  spaces of freedom and rebellion are natural ones. The "Golden Country"
  of Winston's dreams is a pastoral paradise.<sup>36</sup> He and
  Julia's first romantic encounter takes place in a woodland clearing, a
  space outside the reach of the telescreens.<sup>36</sup> The novel's
  constant resource shortages and bleak, polluted urban landscape can be
  interpreted as a critique of unsustainable, centrally planned
  industrial societies that have severed their connection to the natural
  world, seeing it only as a resource to be controlled or
  ignored.<sup>131</sup>

- **Social Justice Readings:** The novel's themes of power, truth, and
  language are frequently invoked in contemporary social justice
  discourse.<sup>135</sup> The concept of "Newspeak" is used by
  commentators across the political spectrum to critique the use of
  politically charged language to shut down debate or enforce
  ideological conformity.<sup>137</sup> The rigid social hierarchy of
  Oceania—the tiny, all-powerful Inner Party (less than 2% of the
  population), the subservient Outer Party, and the vast, ignored Proles
  (85%)—serves as a powerful allegory for class struggle and systemic
  inequality.<sup>138</sup> The novel remains a vital text for
  discussions about how oppressive systems maintain power by dividing
  populations and controlling the narrative.<sup>8</sup>

Engaging with these critiques does not diminish the novel's power; it
enriches it. The book's apparent flaws, such as its gender and racial
blind spots, can be seen as symptomatic of the very totalitarian mindset
it attacks. The Party's ideology is inherently patriarchal and built on
a foundation of nationalism that easily bleeds into racism.<sup>31</sup>
Winston, as a product of this society, inevitably reflects some of its
biases even as he struggles against it. This makes him a more tragic and
realistic figure: not a flawless hero, but a damaged man trying to
unlearn the poison of his own culture, reminding us how deeply a system
of oppression can infect the psychology of those who live within it.

## Part V: Your Toolkit for Critical Thinking

### Section 10: How to Spot Good Sources (A Student's Guide)

Reading *Nineteen Eighty-Four* teaches a crucial lesson: controlling
information is controlling reality. In our digital world, we are
bombarded with information every second. Learning to tell the difference
between reliable facts and propaganda is more important than ever. This
guide is your toolkit for navigating the information landscape and
thinking for yourself—the ultimate act of rebellion in any age.

#### 🟢 Trust these sources:

These sources have processes for fact-checking, editing, and peer
review. They are accountable for the information they publish.

- **University Websites (.edu,.ac.uk,.edu.pl, etc.):** Academic
  institutions are centers of research. Look for publications, faculty
  pages, and library archives.

- **Published Academic Books (with an ISBN):** Books from university
  presses (e.g., Oxford University Press, Harvard University Press) or
  reputable academic publishers have been thoroughly researched and
  vetted.

- **Peer-Reviewed Journals:** These are the gold standard for academic
  research. Articles are reviewed by other experts in the field before
  publication to ensure quality and accuracy. Databases like JSTOR,
  Google Scholar, or university library portals can help you find them.

- **Major Museums and Cultural Institutions:** Organizations like the
  British Museum, the Smithsonian, or national libraries provide
  well-researched historical and cultural information.

- **Established Newspapers with Fact-Checking Standards:** Reputable
  news organizations like The New York Times, The Guardian, the BBC, or
  Reuters have editorial standards and a public reputation to uphold.
  They may have biases, but they are generally committed to factual
  reporting.

- **Author's Official Estate or Foundation:** For information about an
  author's life and work, their official estate (like The Orwell
  Foundation) is a primary source.

- **Polish Trusted Sources:** For research on Polish topics, look to
  sites like **Culture.pl**, the **Instytut Książki** (Book Institute),
  and digital archives like the **Biblioteka Narodowa** (National
  Library) at **polona.pl**. University repositories (e.g.,
  **repozytorium.umk.pl**) are also excellent.

#### 🟡 Use with caution:

These sources can be useful for finding general information or opinions,
but they should always be cross-referenced with more reliable sources.

- **Wikipedia:** It's a fantastic starting point, but it's not a final
  source. Always scroll to the bottom and check the sources in the
  "References" section. A Wikipedia article is only as reliable as the
  sources it cites.

- **Popular Blogs:** A blog post can be insightful, but it's still just
  one person's opinion unless they back up their claims with links to
  trusted sources. Check the author's credentials. Are they an expert in
  this field?

- **YouTube Videos:** Many educational channels produce high-quality
  content. However, always check the creator's background and the
  sources they cite. A video essay is not a substitute for a
  peer-reviewed article.

- **Social Media Posts:** A tweet or TikTok video can alert you to a
  story, but it is not the story itself. Always seek out the original,
  verified source of the information before sharing.

- **Polish Sources:** User-review sites like **Lubimyczytać.pl** are
  great for gauging public opinion but not for factual claims. Student
  forums like **sciaga.pl** can be helpful but often contain paraphrased
  or simplified information that may not be entirely accurate.

#### 🔴 Avoid these:

These sources often prioritize clicks over accuracy and have no
accountability.

- **Anonymous Posts without Sources:** If the author won't put their
  name to it and won't say where they got their information, you can't
  trust it.

- **Sites with Excessive Ads and Clickbait Headlines:** These sites are
  designed to generate ad revenue, not to inform. Their content is often
  sensationalized or completely fabricated.

- **Outdated Information:** Always check the publication date of an
  article, especially for topics related to science, technology, or
  current events.

- **AI-Generated Content without Human Verification:** AI tools like
  ChatGPT can be helpful for brainstorming, but they can also
  "hallucinate" or make up facts and sources. Never use AI-generated
  information in a school paper without verifying every single claim
  with a trusted human source.

- **"Top 10" Lists without Citations:** Fun to read, but terrible for
  research. If a list makes a claim, it needs to say where that claim
  comes from.

- **Polish Warning:** Avoid using school-help sites like **Bryka.pl**
  and similar "opracowania" (study guide) sites as primary sources. They
  are notorious for containing errors, oversimplifications, and
  sometimes outright plagiarism. Use them for a quick summary if you
  must, but never cite them as fact.

#### Pro Tip: The Rule of Three

This is the single most important research skill you can develop. If a
fact, especially a surprising or shocking one, sounds too wild to be
true, **find at least two or three different, independent, and reliable
sources that confirm it.** If only one obscure blog is reporting
something, but major news outlets and academic sources are silent, be
skeptical. This is how you protect yourself from misinformation.

#### Why Citations Matter for YOU

Properly citing sources isn't just a boring rule your teachers make up.
It's a fundamental skill for life in the 21st century.

- **School/University Success:** Teachers and professors love proper
  citations. It shows you've done the work, you respect academic
  integrity, and you're not just making things up. It directly
  translates to better grades.

- **Credibility:** In any discussion, whether in the classroom, online,
  or with friends, people will take you more seriously when you can back
  up your claims with evidence. It's the difference between having an
  opinion and making an argument.

- **Avoiding Plagiarism:** Using someone else's words or ideas without
  giving them credit is plagiarism, and it can get you into serious
  academic trouble. Citations protect you.

- **Future Skills:** Every good job, from marketing to engineering to
  law, requires the ability to find, evaluate, and use information
  responsibly. Fact-checking isn't just a school skill; it's a
  professional one.

- **Social Media Savvy:** In a world of fake news and disinformation,
  knowing how to check sources makes you a smarter, more responsible
  digital citizen. You can be the one who calls out falsehoods with
  actual receipts.

- **Be That Friend:** Who always has the reliable sources to win an
  argument.

## Bibliography

### A. Primary Sources

- <sup>41</sup> Orwell, George.  
  *Nineteen Eighty-Four, The Manuscript*. Facsimile edition. Foreword by
  D.J. Taylor. SP Books, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>41</sup> Orwell, George.  
  *Nineteen Eighty-Four, The Manuscript*. Facsimile edition. SP
  Books, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>140</sup> Siegel, Daniel G. (donor).  
  *Manuscript of Nineteen Eighty-Four*. John Hay Library, Brown
  University, Providence. Donated 1992. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>141</sup> Orwell, George.  
  *1984 (The Manuscript Facsimile)*. SP Books, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>142</sup> Orwell, George. "Handwritten draft of Nineteen
  Eighty-Four." Embellished Manuscripts Collection, John Hay Library,
  Brown University. Reproduced by Paperblanks. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>21</sup> Orwell, George.  
  *The War Commentaries*. Edited by W. J. West. Duckworth/BBC, 1985.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>22</sup> Orwell, George.  
  *Diaries*. Edited by Peter Davison. Harvill Secker, 2009. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>143</sup> Orwell, George.  
  *Homage to Catalonia*. Secker & Warburg, 1938. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

### B. Secondary Sources

#### Polish Sources

- <sup>64</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna. "George Orwell's 1984: The Polish
  Chapter in Light of the PIASA Archives."  
  *The Polish Review*, vol. 61, no. 4, 2016, p. 57. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>66</sup> OneBid. "ORWELL George - 1984 - A novel." Auction
  Listing for 1953 Juliusz Mieroszewski translation. Accessed 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>76</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. Routledge, Forthcoming 2025. (Cited from Smithsonian
  Magazine article). ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>78</sup> OneBid.pl. "ORWELL G. - Rok 1984. 1953. Pierwsze polskie
  wydanie." Auction Listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>79</sup> OneBid.pl. "ORWELL G. - Rok 1984. 1953. Pierwsze polskie
  wydanie." Auction Listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>67</sup> "Rok 1984."  
  *Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>144</sup> Antyk Sobieski. "Orwell, Rok 1984, wyd. 1." Bookseller
  Listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>145</sup> "Dystopian Worlds in the Novels of Aldous Huxley,
  Anthony Burgess and George Orwell and their Polish Translations."  
  *Uniwersytet Marii Curie-Skłodowskiej*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>64</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna. "George Orwell's 1984: The Polish
  Chapter in Light of the PIASA Archives."  
  *The Polish Review*, vol. 61, no. 4, 2016, p. 57. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>77</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. Routledge, Forthcoming 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>66</sup> OneBid. "ORWELL G. - 1984. 1953. first Polish edition."
  Auction Listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>74</sup> Dorosz, Beata. "Orwell według Lechonia (polska
  premiera)."  
  *Archiwum Emigracji*, no. 2 (19), 2013, pp. 7–28. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>81</sup> Krzemien, Zuzanna. "Inheritance books."  
  *British Library European Studies Blog*, 2020. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>82</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. Routledge, Forthcoming 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>12</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. Routledge, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>83</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. Routledge, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>85</sup> "Orwell and Solidarity."  
  *The Orwell Society*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>146</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna. "Orwell on Poland and Political
  Controversies of his Time." University of Southampton. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>83</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. 1st ed., Routledge, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>12</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. Routledge, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>147</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland*. Taylor & Francis, 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>84</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna. "George Orwell and Communist
  Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine Receptions." PhD Thesis,
  University of Southampton, 2022. ResearchGate. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>148</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna. "George Orwell and Communist
  Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine Receptions." PhD Thesis,
  University of Southampton, 2022. ePrints Soton. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>77</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. Routledge, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>90</sup> "Rok 1984 - matura 2025."  
  *otouczelnie.pl*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>91</sup> "Rok 1984 na maturze ustnej - pytania jawne
  odpowiedzi."  
  *poezja.org*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>92</sup> "Rok 1984 - opracowanie zagadnień."  
  *babaodpolskiego.pl*. PDF. Klub Nauczyciela Stentor. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>95</sup> "Rok 1984 zakazany na Białorusi."  
  *lubimyczytac.pl*, 19 May 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>96</sup> "Rok 1984 miał być przestrogą, dziś fabuła tej książki
  się ziszcza, a kamery są wszędzie."  
  *Komputer Świat*, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>149</sup> "Rok 1984."  
  *andrzejewski.siedlce.pl*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>150</sup> "George Orwell – Rok 1984. Współczesna
  interpretacja."  
  *3telnia.pl*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>86</sup> "Rok 1984. Lektura z opracowaniem."  
  *empik.com*. Product Listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>87</sup> "Rok 1984."  
  *wolnelektury.pl*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>88</sup> "Rok 1984. Lektura z opracowaniem."  
  *taniaksiazka.pl*. Product Listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>89</sup> "Rok 1984 Lektura z opracowaniem Klasa 1-4 Liceum."  
  *znak.com.pl*. Product Listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>12</sup> Wieszczek, Krystyna.  
  *George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
  Receptions*. Routledge, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>93</sup> Księżyk, Rafał. "Fala. Rok 1984 i polski postpunk."  
  *zewkultury.pl*. Book review. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>151</sup> "W 2021 witamy 1984!"  
  *mrsip.pl*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>94</sup> "Wywiad: Otwieranie szuflad z napisem 'Prowincja'."  
  *ir2.info*. Interview with Rafał Księżyk. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>98</sup> "Rock Rok 1984, czyli Wielki Brat na scenie
  Monopolis."  
  *lifein.pl*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>93</sup> Księżyk, Rafał. "Fala. Rok 1984 i polski postpunk."  
  *zewkultury.pl*. Book review. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>152</sup> Księżyk, Rafał. "Na prowincji rodzi się nowa fala."  
  *booklips.pl*. Book excerpt. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>153</sup> Księżyk, Rafał. "Fala. Rok 1984 i polski postpunk."  
  *swiatksiazki.pl*. Book listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>95</sup> "Rok 1984 zakazany na Białorusi."  
  *lubimyczytac.pl*, 19 May 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>97</sup> "Rok 1984."  
  *lubimyczytac.pl*. User review. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>67</sup> "Rok 1984."  
  *Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>154</sup> Kotowska-Kachel, Maria. "Tomasz Mirkowicz, tłumacz Roku
  1984 George'a Orwella, i jego opowiadanie pt. Tunel."  
  *Repozytorium Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku*. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>155</sup> Wieszczek-de Oliveira, Krystyna. "O wczesnych relacjach
  Orwella z Polską i Polakami."  
  *Repozytorium Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku*. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>156</sup> "100 polskich płyt 80s pop (1980-1989) – moje
  ulubione."  
  *alternativepop.pl*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>157</sup> "Nowomowa jako sposób na ograniczenie wolności
  człowieka."  
  *otouczelnie.pl*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>158</sup> "1984: Literatura i kultura schyłkowego PRL-u."  
  *Repozytorium Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku*. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>80</sup> "George Orwell, Rok 1984. Czy ta wizja świata może być
  aktualna? vol.2."  
  *radiokampus.fm*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

#### Academic Sources (English)

- <sup>24</sup> Crick, Bernard. "Orwell, Jura and 'Nineteen
  Eighty-Four'."  
  *University of Toronto Quarterly*, vol. 80, no. 1, 2011, pp. 78-87.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>30</sup> Pimlott, Ben. "Introduction to Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *The Orwell Foundation*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>16</sup> Ross, John J. "Tuberculosis, Bronchiectasis, and
  Infertility: What Ailed George Orwell?"  
  *Clinical Infectious Diseases*, vol. 41, no. 11, 2005, pp. 1599-1603.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>26</sup> Infectious Diseases Society of America. "Tuberculosis,
  Infertility May Have Influenced George Orwell's Writing."  
  *ScienceDaily*, 20 Oct. 2005. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>27</sup> MacPherson, Gordon. "The fight that created a novel."  
  *Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal*, vol. 1, no. 2, 2006, pp.
  12-15. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>13</sup> Namin, Sarah. "The Development of George Orwell's
  Political Ideology." Senior Thesis, Dominican University of
  California, 2019. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>14</sup> "George Orwell."  
  *Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>32</sup> Rossi, John. "How the Most Influential Novel Ever
  Written Has Been Misunderstood."  
  *Acton Institute*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>38</sup> Kim, Min-Hyoung. "The Uncanny Golden Country: Repetition
  and the Politics of Form in Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *Modernism/modernity*, vol. 25, no. 3, 2018, pp. 509-532. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>37</sup> Sami, W. "A Semiotic Analysis of Threat and Warning
  Symbols in George Orwell's Novel 1984."  
  *ResearchGate*, 2016. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>69</sup> Luxmoore, Jonathan.  
  *Martyrdom in Poland: 1984*. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>159</sup> Boukrif, R., & Boukrif, L. "Diffuse Surveillance in
  George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four and in the Digital Era."  
  *Sciences et Actions Sociales*, vol. 12, 2019. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>160</sup> Kronenfeld, David B., and Henry Kučera. "Language,
  Nineteen Eighty-four, and 1989."  
  *Language in Society*, vol. 22, no. 1, 1993, pp. 1-18. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>161</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *BCP: Frontiers in Humanities and Social Sciences*, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>45</sup> Kaji, Y. "The Reception of George Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four in the Eastern Bloc during the Cold War."  
  *Waseda RILAS Journal*, no. 13, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>162</sup> "BHP 203: George Orwell and Nineteen Eighty-Four."
  Sample Syllabus, Rider University. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>163</sup> "Connecting Nineteen Eighty-Four to Today."  
  *The Teachers Institute of Philadelphia*. Curriculum Unit.
  Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>164</sup> "New College Review: 1984."  
  *University of Alabama*, 1984. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>162</sup> "BHP 203: George Orwell and Nineteen Eighty-Four."
  Sample Syllabus, Rider University. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>165</sup> "Totalitarian Novels."  
  *Hillsdale College Online Courses*. Course description. Accessed 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>166</sup> "George Orwell and Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *OpenLearn*, The Open University. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>123</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four Portrays Totalitarianism and Mind
  Control."  
  *EBSCO Research Starters*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>122</sup> Al-Shara, S. M. "George Orwell and the idea of Sadism
  in Nineteen Eighty-Four: A psychoanalytic perspective."  
  *International Journal of Recent Advances in Multidisciplinary
  Research*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>125</sup> West, Emily. "'The few cubic centimetres inside your
  skull': a neurological reading of George Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four."  
  *Medical Humanities*, vol. 44, no. 4, 2018, pp. 282-288. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>131</sup> "Editor's Note: Environmental History and the History
  of Expectations."  
  *Journal of the History of Ideas*, vol. 84, no. 4, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>129</sup> Gunes, F., & Genc, G. "Ecopsychological Perspectives on
  George Orwell's 1984: Exploring Nature's Deprivation and
  Restoration."  
  *KARE*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>132</sup> "Nature as an uncontrolled space in George Orwell's
  Nineteen Eighty-four and Aldous Huxley's Brave New World." Lund
  University Student Papers, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>136</sup> "A Feminist Critique of George Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four: Examining Gender Bias and Calls for Prohibition."  
  *SSSH*, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>167</sup> "Not Death but Annihilation: Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four and the Catastrophe of Englishness."  
  *University of Washington English Department*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>125</sup> West, Emily. "'The few cubic centimetres inside your
  skull': a neurological reading of George Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four."  
  *PubMed*, 2018. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>126</sup> Al-Shara, S. M. "George Orwell and the idea of Sadism
  in Nineteen Eighty-Four: A psychoanalytic perspective."  
  *ResearchGate*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>127</sup> Al-Shara, S. M. "George Orwell and the idea of Sadism
  in Nineteen Eighty-Four: A psychoanalytic perspective."  
  *International Journal of Recent Advances in Multidisciplinary
  Research*, 2024. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>128</sup> "The Psychological Consequences of Totalitarian
  Control." Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology, 2023. PDF.
  ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>130</sup> Gunes, F., & Genc, G. "Ecopsychological Perspectives on
  George Orwell's 1984: Exploring Nature's Deprivation and
  Restoration."  
  *Dergipark*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>133</sup> "Nature as an uncontrolled space in George Orwell's
  'Nineteen Eighty-four' and Aldous Huxley's 'Brave New World'."  
  *Lund University Publications*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>168</sup> "George Orwell's Critical Reception."  
  *Salem Press*. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>169</sup> Rodden, John.  
  *The Politics of Literary Reputation: The Making and Claiming of 'St.
  George' Orwell*. Oxford University Press, 1989. (Cited in review).
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>161</sup> Mohammad, H. B., et al. "George Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four as a Satirical Work."  
  *BCP: Frontiers in Humanities and Social Sciences*, vol. 3, no.
  5, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>170</sup> Bloom, Harold, editor.  
  *George Orwell's 1984*. Bloom's Modern Critical Interpretations,
  Chelsea House Publishers, 1987. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>171</sup> "Representations of Disability in Television Series."  
  *The Aquila Digital Community*, University of Southern
  Mississippi, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>167</sup> "Not Death but Annihilation: Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four and the Catastrophe of Englishness."  
  *University of Washington English Department*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>172</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four: Analysis of Major Characters."  
  *EBSCO Research Starters*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>173</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four: Analysis of Major Characters."  
  *EBSCO Research Starters*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>124</sup> "The Psychoanalysis of 1984."  
  *Bartleby.com*. Student Essay. ⭐

- <sup>174</sup> "George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four carries a
  'cultural afterlife'."  
  *Clemson University Open*. Thesis. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### International Academic Sources

- <sup>55</sup> "A Study of the Chinese Translations of George Orwell's
  Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *The University of Hong Kong Libraries*. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>56</sup> "Orienting Orwell: Asian and Global Perspectives on
  George Orwell."  
  *Concentric: Literary and Cultural Studies*, 2013. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>58</sup> Almomani, Ayman. "Translating Nineteen Eighty-Four into
  Arabic."  
  *Patchwork Student Journal*, Conference Edition, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>175</sup> Sansal, Boualem.  
  *2084: The End of the World*. (Cited in context of Arabic dystopia).
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>51</sup> Morente Aliaga, María de la Luz. "La traducción de la
  neolengua de Orwell en 1984: análisis contrastivo de tres traducciones
  publicadas." Master's Thesis, University of Valladolid, 2024. PDF.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>52</sup> Vázquez, Micaela. "La huella de la censura franquista:
  la primera traducción española de 1984."  
  *Vasos Comunicantes*, ACE Traductores, 2020. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>53</sup> Boschetti Hofer, Fabiana, et al. "La censura en la
  traducción. '1984' y el Régimen."  
  *Revista Contrapunto*, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>54</sup> Meseguer, Purificación.  
  *La traducción al servicio del franquismo: sexo, política y
  religión*. 2015. (Cited in context). ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>53</sup> Boschetti Hofer, Fabiana, et al. "La censura en la
  traducción. '1984' y el Régimen."  
  *Revista Contrapunto*, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>51</sup> Morente Aliaga, María de la Luz. "La traducción de la
  neolengua de Orwell en 1984." Master's Thesis, University of
  Valladolid, 2024. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>53</sup> Boschetti Hofer, Fabiana, et al. "La censura en la
  traducción. '1984' y el Régimen."  
  *Revista Contrapunto*, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>176</sup> "Recensione: 1984 di George Orwell."  
  *Rosa del Deserto blog*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>65</sup> Bova, Francesco. "Quando la critica stroncò '1984' di
  Orwell, da Calvino a Togliatti."  
  *Sololibri.net*, 15 Dec. 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>177</sup> Daltin, Mauro. "1984 di George Orwell."  
  *Terre di Confine*, 4 Oct. 2014. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>178</sup>  
  *L'antistalinismo di sinistra e la sfida del totalitarismo*.
  FrancoAngeli, 2008. PDF. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>179</sup> La Sala, Federico. "'IL MITO GRECO' E '1984' DI
  ORWELL."  
  *La Voce di Fiore*, 2022. ⭐⭐

- <sup>180</sup> "1984 di George Orwell."  
  *Progetto Babele*. Book review. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

#### Popular Sources (Reputable Magazines, Newspapers, Documentaries)

- <sup>28</sup> Malies, Jeremy. "George Orwell writing 'Nineteen
  Eighty-Four' on the island of Jura."  
  *The Letterpress Project*, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>25</sup> Daley, Jason. "George Orwell Wrote '1984' While Dying of
  Tuberculosis."  
  *Smithsonian Magazine*, 24 Mar. 2017. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>3</sup> "George Orwell."  
  *SparkNotes*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>18</sup>halla, Sever. "3 Real-Life Inspirations for George
  Orwell's 1984."  
  *Foundation for Economic Education*, 2021. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>7</sup> Westenberg, Joan. "Please Stop Comparing Things to
  1984."  
  *Electric Literature*, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>4</sup> "Why is George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four still
  relevant 75 years later?"  
  *RNZ*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>33</sup> "1984: Symbols."  
  *SparkNotes*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>2</sup> "1984: Historical Context."  
  *BookAnalysis.com*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>19</sup> "The History That Inspired Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four."  
  *HistoryExtra*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>1</sup> Cavendish, Richard. "Publication of George Orwell's
  Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *History Today*, vol. 49, no. 6, June 1999. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>68</sup> Erofeyev, Victor. "I Just Translated '1984' Into
  Russian. I'm Gasping for Air."  
  *The Moscow Times*, 26 Nov. 2019. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>15</sup> Eaude, Michael. "How Spain's Civil War defined George
  Orwell politically."  
  *Elcano Royal Institute*, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>50</sup> "East Berlin Through the Lens of George Orwell's
  1984."  
  *Urban Labs CE*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>47</sup> Ratner, Vadim. "How Did George Orwell Know?"  
  *Acton Institute*, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>48</sup> Rossi, John. "Why '1984' Topped the Russian Bestseller
  List."  
  *Commonweal Magazine*, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>181</sup> Takahashi, Ryo. "The Japanese media and its Orwellian
  nature."  
  *Japan Today*, 27 Mar. 2010. ⭐⭐

- <sup>182</sup> Grossberg, Michael. "An Appreciation of George Orwell's
  Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *Prometheus Blog*, Libertarian Futurist Society, 10 May 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>113</sup> Rentoul, John. "Top 10 fake George Orwell
  quotations."  
  *The Independent*, 16 Sep. 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>183</sup> "Famous George Orwell Quotes."  
  *Pan Macmillan*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>39</sup> Anderson, Laura. "The Best 1984 Quotes To Make You
  Question Your Reality."  
  *Book Riot*, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>20</sup> "1984: Quotes."  
  *SparkNotes*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>184</sup> "How TIME Reviewed Nineteen Eighty-Four in 1949."  
  *TIME Magazine*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>185</sup> Munday, Rebecca. "Banned Books Week: '1984' by George
  Orwell Review."  
  *The George-Anne*, 28 Sep. 2021. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>46</sup> Bergman, Jay. "A Novel That Threatened a Nation."  
  *The Censorship Files*, 2015. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>44</sup> "Read the First Reviews of George Orwell's Nineteen
  Eighty-Four."  
  *Literary Hub*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>29</sup> "10 Facts You May Not Know About George Orwell's
  1984."  
  *WellRead Company Blog*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>186</sup> "'1984': How George Orwell's Big Brother was born
  during the Spanish Civil War."  
  *El País English*, 26 Nov. 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>187</sup> "Homage to Motihari?: George Orwell's Indian roots."  
  *Oxbridge Applications*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>188</sup> Mara, Wil. "Banned Books: Orwell, Bradbury, Lee &
  Salinger."  
  *West 44 Books Blog*, 3 May 2023. ⭐⭐

- <sup>23</sup> "Five Fascinating Facts about George Orwell's 1984."  
  *Kaggsy's Bookish Ramblings blog*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>29</sup> "10 Facts You May Not Know About George Orwell's
  1984."  
  *WellRead Company Blog*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>120</sup> "New '1984' Foreword Includes Warning About
  'Problematic' Characters."  
  *Newsweek*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>135</sup> "The New Newspeak: How Social Justice is Politicizing
  Language."  
  *Goldwater Institute*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>137</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *Shelf Reflection blog*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>189</sup> "Mil Novecentos e Oitenta e Quatro."  
  *Livros do Brasil*. Product Page. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>190</sup> "1984."  
  *Porto Editora*. Product Page. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>191</sup> "George Orwell."  
  *Bertrand Livreiros*. Author Page. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>192</sup> "The Orwell Prizes."  
  *Bookshop.org*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>193</sup> "Critical Insights: Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *Salem Press*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>194</sup> Westenberg, Joan. "This is just like 1984!"  
  *Medium*, 2023. ⭐⭐

- <sup>195</sup> "'1984' Is Not Just a Dystopian Novel Anymore."  
  *EdPost*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>196</sup> Plinths, Helen. "Social Justice Groupthink."  
  *The Hudson Review*, 2021. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>139</sup> Preece, James. "The Secrets of Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *International Socialism Journal*, 2019. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>8</sup> "The Modern Impacts of George Orwell's 1984."  
  *London HUA Wiki*. WPI. ⭐⭐

#### Digital and Multimedia Sources

- <sup>36</sup> "An Analysis of the Symbolic Imagery in 1984."  
  *Kibin*. Essay example. ⭐

- <sup>34</sup> Tariq, Izz. "Symbolism and Allegory in George Orwell's
  Novel 1984."  
  *Medium*, 2023. ⭐⭐

- <sup>5</sup> "1984 by George Orwell (Video Summary)."  
  *Schooling Online*. YouTube, 2020. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>17</sup> "TIL that George Orwell participated in the Spanish
  Civil War."  
  *r/todayilearned*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>197</sup> "Where does the 1984 timeline differ from our own?"  
  *r/1984*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>99</sup> "Adaptations of Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *Wikipedia*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>100</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four (British TV programme)."  
  *Wikipedia*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>101</sup> "Televising the Future: Nineteen Eighty-Four and the
  imagination of Nigel Kneale."  
  *University of Cambridge*. YouTube, 2021. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>102</sup> "1984."  
  *Dramatic Publishing*. Play script listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>103</sup> "1984 by George Orwell adapted for the stage by Michael
  Gene Sullivan."  
  *Playscripts Inc*. Play script listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>99</sup> "Adaptations of Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *Wikipedia*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>104</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four (1953 - NBC)."  
  *Internet Archive*. Audio recording. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>105</sup> "1984: the graphic novel."  
  *Brooklyn Public Library*. Catalog entry. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>106</sup> "1984: the graphic novel."  
  *Grounds BHM*. Product listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>107</sup> "1984 on Steam."  
  *Steam Store*. Game listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>108</sup> "1984 on Steam."  
  *Steam Store*. Game listing. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>198</sup> "Corruption Of Youth In George Orwell's 1984."  
  *Bartleby.com*. Student essay. ⭐

- <sup>199</sup> "1984 prepared me for adulthood."  
  *Salon*, 30 Oct. 2013. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>200</sup> "Youth Review: 1984 by George Orwell."  
  *Thunder Bay Public Library Blog*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>9</sup> @presdanmyersmu. "Book of the Week: Nineteen
  Eighty-Four."  
  *TikTok*, 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>10</sup> @comrade_sinque. "Understanding 1984: A Critical
  Analysis of Current Politics."  
  *TikTok*, 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>11</sup> @frederick.atkinson. "Three George Orwell Books You
  Should Read."  
  *TikTok*, 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>109</sup> Course Hero. "1984 by George Orwell."  
  *YouTube* playlist. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>110</sup> Jeddle. "Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *YouTube* playlist. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>111</sup> Classic Masterworks. "1984 by George Orwell."  
  *YouTube* playlist. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>112</sup> "1984 Quotes by George Orwell."  
  *Goodreads*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>42</sup> "The 30 Best Quotes From 1984."  
  *Four Minute Books*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>43</sup> "1984 quotes and meanings."  
  *Quizlet*. Flash cards. ⭐

- <sup>114</sup> "Things that Orwell did not write or say, but are
  quoted as his anyway."  
  *r/literature*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>115</sup> "Things that Orwell did not write or say, but are
  quoted as his anyway."  
  *r/books*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>201</sup> "1984 inspired art."  
  *Pinterest*. Idea board. ⭐

- <sup>202</sup> "1984 George Orwell Paintings for Sale."  
  *Fine Art America*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>203</sup> "Made a playlist inspired by George Orwell's 1984."  
  *r/spotify*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>204</sup> "10 Punk Songs Influenced by George Orwell's '1984'."  
  *Dying Scene*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>205</sup> "Category:Music based on Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *Wikipedia*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>119</sup> "Queer themes in 1984."  
  *r/1984*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>206</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four (1984)."  
  *PASSIA*. Product listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>207</sup> "1984 (Arabic)."  
  *Catch of the Day Books*. Product listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>208</sup> "1984."  
  *Goodreads*. Arabic edition listing. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>209</sup> "Notes on Nineteen Eighty Four."  
  *India Bookworld*. Product listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>210</sup> "Famous '1984' and 'Animal Farm' writer George Orwell
  was born in Motihari, Bihar, in India."  
  *r/Indianbooks*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>211</sup> "1984 (es)."  
  *Livraria Lello*. Product listing. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>59</sup> "1984 (livro)."  
  *Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>212</sup> "1984 (Portuguese Edition)."  
  *AbeBooks*. Product listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>213</sup> "When people say '1984 was banned in the us' what are
  they talking about?"  
  *r/NoStupidQuestions*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>214</sup> "George Orwell's '1984' BANNED in High Schools."  
  *r/Capitalism*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>215</sup> "George Orwell."  
  *Wikipedia*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>216</sup> "The Orwell Tour."  
  *The Book Trail*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>217</sup> "The Orwell Tour."  
  *Icon Books*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>218</sup> "SPOJLERY."  
  *P42*. YouTube video. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>219</sup> "Kino Helios Polska."  
  *YouTube*. Search results for \#małekobietki. Accessed 2025. ⭐

- <sup>220</sup> "BEZGŁOS - Katarzyna Puzyńska w horrorowej odsłonie."  
  *Okoń w sieci*. YouTube video. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>221</sup> @julios.books.  
  *TikTok* video. Accessed 2025. ⭐

- <sup>60</sup> "Brazil: On This Day, Thursday."  
  *Films Fatale*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>61</sup> "Brazil (1985) is a true masterpiece."  
  *r/TrueFilm*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>222</sup> "Stretching the Face of Dystopia: The Illusion of
  Precision in Brazil."  
  *Establishing Shot blog*, Indiana University. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>223</sup> "Literary Tours of England \| George Orwell."  
  *Literary Tours England*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>224</sup> "George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *London Fictions*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>225</sup> "Events."  
  *The Orwell Society*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>226</sup> "George Orwell — Free and self-guided walking tours
  around LONDON."  
  *Walk Me Blog*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>227</sup> "Orwell's 1984 was not a dystopian novel/movie, but a
  bizzaro utopia..."  
  *r/FanTheories*. Reddit thread. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>228</sup> "Putting People Before Disabilities."  
  *Orthodox Union*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>229</sup> "Commentary On George Orwell's 1984."  
  *Bartleby.com*. Student essay. ⭐

- <sup>230</sup> "George Orwell."  
  *British Museum*. Collection entry. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>231</sup> "George Orwell House, Hertfordshire."  
  *GetYourGuide*. Tour listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>232</sup> "George Orwell's London, Mapped."  
  *Londonist*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>233</sup> "Past Lives: George Orwell in London."  
  *English Heritage*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>234</sup> "Nineteen Eighty-Four."  
  *Easton Press*. Product listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>235</sup> "George Orwell T-Shirts."  
  *TeePublic*. Product listings. ⭐

- <sup>236</sup> "Nineteen Eighty Four T-Shirts."  
  *Redbubble*. Product listings. ⭐

- <sup>237</sup> "Follow in the footsteps of George Orwell and make a
  journey to Jura."  
  *Wild About Argyll*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>238</sup> "Isle of Jura."  
  *VisitScotland*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>239</sup> "Guide To Jura, Scotland."  
  *Outlook Traveller*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>228</sup> "Putting People Before Disabilities."  
  *Orthodox Union*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐

- <sup>239</sup> "Guide To Jura, Scotland."  
  *Outlook Traveller*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>237</sup> "Follow in the footsteps of George Orwell and make a
  journey to Jura."  
  *Wild About Argyll*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>240</sup> "Jura: Visiting the Scottish island that spawned George
  Orwell's 1984."  
  *The National*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>241</sup> "Isle of Jura."  
  *Islands.scot blog*. Accessed 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- <sup>242</sup> "In the Footsteps of George Orwell."  
  *Pipsticks Walks*. Tour listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>231</sup> "George Orwell House, Hertfordshire."  
  *GetYourGuide*. Tour listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>243</sup> "Literary London Walking Tour."  
  *Walks.com*. Tour listing. ⭐⭐

- <sup>244</sup> "Private Islington Walking Tours."  
  *London Guided Walks*. Tour listing. ⭐⭐

### C. Missing Sources Note

- **Topics where reliable sources couldn't be found:** Comprehensive
  data on student reactions to the book in Polish schools across
  different generations proved elusive. While its presence in the
  curriculum is well-documented, specific pedagogical studies or
  large-scale surveys of student reception were not available in the
  provided materials. Similarly, detailed information on fanfiction
  communities, particularly in non-Anglophone contexts like Poland, was
  sparse. Information on museum exhibitions specifically dedicated to
  *Nineteen Eighty-Four* (as opposed to Orwell more broadly) was also
  limited.

- **Claims that need verification:** The precise number of underground
  copies printed in Poland during the communist era is difficult to
  verify; sources provide estimates but exact figures are, by the nature
  of clandestine activity, unavailable. The full extent of CIA
  involvement in distributing *Nineteen Eighty-Four* specifically (as
  opposed to *Animal Farm* and other anti-communist literature) requires
  more declassified documentation for full verification.<sup>76</sup>

- **Areas requiring further research:** The reception of *Nineteen
  Eighty-Four* in many parts of the world, including much of Africa,
  Southeast Asia (beyond Japan), and Latin America (beyond Brazil),
  remains under-researched in English-language scholarship. A deeper
  dive into local literary journals and academic databases in these
  regions would be necessary for a truly comprehensive global picture.

- **Languages where scholarship is lacking:** While reception in major
  European and some Asian languages is documented, scholarly analysis of
  the book's translation and impact in languages like Hindi, Swahili, or
  indigenous languages is not well-represented in the available sources.

#### Cytowane prace

1.  Publication of George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four \| History
    Today, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.historytoday.com/archive/months-past/publication-george-orwell%E2%80%99s-nineteen-eighty-four</u>](https://www.historytoday.com/archive/months-past/publication-george-orwell%E2%80%99s-nineteen-eighty-four)

2.  1984 Historical Context - Book Analysis, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bookanalysis.com/george-orwell/1984/historical-context/</u>](https://bookanalysis.com/george-orwell/1984/historical-context/)

3.  George Orwell and 1984 Background - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/1984/context/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/1984/context/)

4.  Why is George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four still relevant 75 years
    later? \| RNZ, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.rnz.co.nz/national/programmes/nights/audio/2018944629/why-is-george-orwell-s-nineteen-eighty-four-still-relevant-75-years-later</u>](https://www.rnz.co.nz/national/programmes/nights/audio/2018944629/why-is-george-orwell-s-nineteen-eighty-four-still-relevant-75-years-later)

5.  Context of 1984 - 1984 by George Orwell - Schooling Online -
    YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ApU9uvZIOdY</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ApU9uvZIOdY)

6.  George Orwell 1984 Español - Audiobooks Now, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.audiobooksnow.com/audiobook/george-orwell-1984-espanol/8474297/</u>](https://www.audiobooksnow.com/audiobook/george-orwell-1984-espanol/8474297/)

7.  Please Stop Comparing Things to "1984" - Electric Literature,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://electricliterature.com/please-stop-comparing-things-to-1984/</u>](https://electricliterature.com/please-stop-comparing-things-to-1984/)

8.  The Modern Impacts of George Orwell's 1984 - Londonhua WIKI,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://londonhuawiki.wpi.edu/index.php/The_Modern_Impacts_of_George_Orwell%27s_1984</u>](https://londonhuawiki.wpi.edu/index.php/The_Modern_Impacts_of_George_Orwell%27s_1984)

9.  Book of the Week: Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell Dan's ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@presdanmyersmu/video/7519497695334010143</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@presdanmyersmu/video/7519497695334010143)

10. Understanding 1984: A Critical Analysis of Current Politics -
    TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@comrade_sinque/video/7527796415771266359</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@comrade_sinque/video/7527796415771266359)

11. Understanding George Orwell's 1984: A Deep Dive - TikTok, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@frederick.atkinson/video/7474695290428116246</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@frederick.atkinson/video/7474695290428116246)

12. George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and Clandestine
    Receptions, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.routledge.com/George-Orwell-and-Communist-Poland-Emigre-Official-and-Clandestine-Receptions/Wieszczek/p/book/9781032409535</u>](https://www.routledge.com/George-Orwell-and-Communist-Poland-Emigre-Official-and-Clandestine-Receptions/Wieszczek/p/book/9781032409535)

13. Contextualizing George Orwell: How Orwell's Life Experiences
    Influenced his Most Famous Novels - Dominican Scholar, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://scholar.dominican.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1004&context=history-politics-international-studies-senior-theses</u>](https://scholar.dominican.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1004&context=history-politics-international-studies-senior-theses)

14. Orwell, George \| Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://iep.utm.edu/george-orwell/</u>](https://iep.utm.edu/george-orwell/)

15. How Spain's Civil War defined George Orwell politically - Real
    Instituto Elcano, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.realinstitutoelcano.org/en/commentaries/how-spains-civil-war-defined-george-orwell-politically/</u>](https://www.realinstitutoelcano.org/en/commentaries/how-spains-civil-war-defined-george-orwell-politically/)

16. Tuberculosis, Bronchiectasis, and Infertility: What Ailed George
    Orwell? \| Clinical Infectious Diseases \| Oxford Academic,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/41/11/1599/356821</u>](https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/41/11/1599/356821)

17. TIL that George Orwell participated in the Spanish Civil War
    (1936-1939); after travelling as a journalist for reporting on the
    war, he later enlisted as a soldier against fascism. In the photo
    some of his comrades can be seen with Ernest Hemingway in the
    background (1937). : r/todayilearned - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/todayilearned/comments/1gjrz31/til_that_george_orwell_participated_in_the/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/todayilearned/comments/1gjrz31/til_that_george_orwell_participated_in_the/)

18. 3 Real-Life Inspirations for George Orwell's 1984 - FEE.org,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://fee.org/articles/3-real-life-inspirations-for-george-orwell-s-1984/</u>](https://fee.org/articles/3-real-life-inspirations-for-george-orwell-s-1984/)

19. www.historyextra.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.historyextra.com/period/historical-inspiration-george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four/#:~:text=Nineteen%20Eighty%2DFour%2C%20Orwell%20insisted,in%20the%20Spanish%20Civil%20War.</u>](https://www.historyextra.com/period/historical-inspiration-george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four/#:~:text=Nineteen%20Eighty%2DFour%2C%20Orwell%20insisted,in%20the%20Spanish%20Civil%20War.)

20. 1984: Famous Quotes Explained - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/1984/quotes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/1984/quotes/)

21. George Orwell: War Broadcasts and War Commentaries - Marxists
    Internet Archive, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.marxists.org/archive/hardcastle/1987/orwell_war.htm</u>](https://www.marxists.org/archive/hardcastle/1987/orwell_war.htm)

22. Orwell and the BBC \| George Orwell - The Orwell Institute,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://orwellinstitute.com/orwell-bbc.html</u>](https://orwellinstitute.com/orwell-bbc.html)

23. Five Fascinating Facts about George Orwell's 1984 \| Kaggsy's
    Bookish Ramblings, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://kaggsysbookishramblings.wordpress.com/2014/06/08/five-fascinating-facts-about-george-orwells-1984/</u>](https://kaggsysbookishramblings.wordpress.com/2014/06/08/five-fascinating-facts-about-george-orwells-1984/)

24. Orwell on Jura: Locating Nineteen Eighty-Four \| University of
    Toronto Quarterly, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://utppublishing.com/doi/10.3138/utq.80.1.078</u>](https://utppublishing.com/doi/10.3138/utq.80.1.078)

25. George Orwell Wrote '1984' While Dying of Tuberculosis, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/george-orwell-wrote-1984-while-dying-tuberculosis-180962608/</u>](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/george-orwell-wrote-1984-while-dying-tuberculosis-180962608/)

26. Tuberculosis, Infertility May Have Influenced George Orwell's
    Writing \| ScienceDaily, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2005/10/051020090008.htm</u>](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2005/10/051020090008.htm)

27. Down and almost out in Scotland: George Orwell, tuberculosis and
    getting streptomycin in 1948 - PMC, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1360500/</u>](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1360500/)

28. George Orwell writing "Nineteen Eighty-Four" on the island of Jura
    \| The Letterpress Project, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.letterpressproject.co.uk/inspiring-older-readers/2025-01-20/george-orwell-writing-nineteen-eighty-four-on-the-island-of-jura</u>](https://www.letterpressproject.co.uk/inspiring-older-readers/2025-01-20/george-orwell-writing-nineteen-eighty-four-on-the-island-of-jura)

29. 10 Facts You May Not Know About George Orwell's '1984' - Well Read
    Co., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://us.wellreadcompany.com/blogs/well-read-company-blog/10-facts-you-may-not-know-about-george-orwells-1984</u>](https://us.wellreadcompany.com/blogs/well-read-company-blog/10-facts-you-may-not-know-about-george-orwells-1984)

30. Ben Pimlott: Introduction to Nineteen Eighty-Four \| The Orwell ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.orwellfoundation.com/the-orwell-foundation/orwell/articles/ben-pimlott-introduction-to-nineteen-eighty-four/</u>](https://www.orwellfoundation.com/the-orwell-foundation/orwell/articles/ben-pimlott-introduction-to-nineteen-eighty-four/)

31. Nineteen Eighty-Four - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nineteen_Eighty-Four</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nineteen_Eighty-Four)

32. How the Most Influential Novel Ever Written Has Been Misunderstood,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://rlo.acton.org/archives/125629-how-the-most-influential-novel-ever-written-has-been-misunderstood.html</u>](https://rlo.acton.org/archives/125629-how-the-most-influential-novel-ever-written-has-been-misunderstood.html)

33. 1984: Symbols \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/1984/symbols/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/1984/symbols/)

34. Symbolism and allegory in George Orwell's novel “1984" \| by Izz
    Tariq - Medium, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://medium.com/@izz.tariq2006/symbolism-and-allegory-in-george-orwells-novel-1984-3a37476f6b97</u>](https://medium.com/@izz.tariq2006/symbolism-and-allegory-in-george-orwells-novel-1984-3a37476f6b97)

35. The Community Manipulation through Big Brother's Tyranny in George
    Orwell's Nineteen Eighty Four - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366886822_The_Community_Manipulation_through_Big_Brother's_Tyranny_in_George_Orwell's_Nineteen_Eighty_Four</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366886822_The_Community_Manipulation_through_Big_Brother's_Tyranny_in_George_Orwell's_Nineteen_Eighty_Four)

36. An Analysis of the Symbolic Imagery in 1984, a Novel by George
    Orwell \| Kibin, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.kibin.com/essay-examples/an-analysis-of-the-symbolic-imagery-in-1984-a-novel-by-george-orwell-WkzkOE1q</u>](https://www.kibin.com/essay-examples/an-analysis-of-the-symbolic-imagery-in-1984-a-novel-by-george-orwell-WkzkOE1q)

37. (PDF) A Semiotic Analysis of Threat and Warning Symbols in George
    Orwell's Novel 1984, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/294886724_A_Semiotic_Analysis_of_Threat_and_Warning_Symbols_in_George_Orwell's_Novel_1984</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/294886724_A_Semiotic_Analysis_of_Threat_and_Warning_Symbols_in_George_Orwell's_Novel_1984)

38. The Uncanny Golden Country: Late-Modernist Utopia in Nineteen
    Eighty-Four, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://modernismmodernity.org/articles/uncanny-golden-country</u>](https://modernismmodernity.org/articles/uncanny-golden-country)

39. 25 1984 Quotes That Are Way Too Real \| Book Riot, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bookriot.com/1984-quotes/</u>](https://bookriot.com/1984-quotes/)

40. George Orwell's "1984": quotes and paintings that appeal to ... -
    Arthive, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://arthive.com/news/641~George_Orwells_1984_quotes_and_paintings_that_appeal_to_consciousness</u>](https://arthive.com/news/641~George_Orwells_1984_quotes_and_paintings_that_appeal_to_consciousness)

41. 1984 \| The manuscript of Nineteen Eighty-Four \| George Orwell,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.spbooks.com/150-1984-9791095457114.html</u>](https://www.spbooks.com/150-1984-9791095457114.html)

42. 1984 Quotes: The 30 Best & Most Important Lines From George Orwell's
    Masterpiece, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://fourminutebooks.com/1984-quotes/</u>](https://fourminutebooks.com/1984-quotes/)

43. 1984 quotes and meanings Flashcards - Quizlet, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://quizlet.com/330624268/1984-quotes-and-meanings-flash-cards/</u>](https://quizlet.com/330624268/1984-quotes-and-meanings-flash-cards/)

44. Read the first reviews of George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four. -
    Literary Hub, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lithub.com/read-the-first-reviews-of-george-orwells-nineteen-eighty-four/</u>](https://lithub.com/read-the-first-reviews-of-george-orwells-nineteen-eighty-four/)

45. Index on Censorship: How George Orwells Banned Novel, Nineteen ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://waseda.repo.nii.ac.jp/record/2001886/files/TagenBunka_13_8.pdf</u>](https://waseda.repo.nii.ac.jp/record/2001886/files/TagenBunka_13_8.pdf)

46. 1984 - The Censorship Files - WordPress.com, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://thecensorshipfiles.wordpress.com/volume-1/issue-2/a-novel-that-threatened-a-nation/</u>](https://thecensorshipfiles.wordpress.com/volume-1/issue-2/a-novel-that-threatened-a-nation/)

47. How Did George Orwell Know? – Religion & Liberty Online, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://rlo.acton.org/archives/124979-how-did-george-orwell-know.html</u>](https://rlo.acton.org/archives/124979-how-did-george-orwell-know.html)

48. Why '1984' Topped the Russian Bestseller List - Commonweal Magazine,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.commonwealmagazine.org/george-orwell-1984-russia-putin-propaganda</u>](https://www.commonwealmagazine.org/george-orwell-1984-russia-putin-propaganda)

49. The perception of George Orwell in Germany - GRIN \| Grin,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.grin.com/document/82662</u>](https://www.grin.com/document/82662)

50. The Rise of Totalitarianism: East Berlin Through the Lens of George
    Orwell's 1984, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://urbanlabsce.eu/the-rise-of-totalitarianism-east-berlin-through-the-lens-of-george-orwells-1984/</u>](https://urbanlabsce.eu/the-rise-of-totalitarianism-east-berlin-through-the-lens-of-george-orwells-1984/)

51. La traducción de la neolengua de Orwell en 1984: análisis ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://uvadoc.uva.es/bitstream/handle/10324/66167/TFM-O-64.pdf?sequence=1</u>](https://uvadoc.uva.es/bitstream/handle/10324/66167/TFM-O-64.pdf?sequence=1)

52. La huella de la censura franquista: la primera traducción española
    de 1984, Micaela Vázquez - Vasos Comunicantes \| Revista de ACE
    Traductores, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://vasoscomunicantes.ace-traductores.org/2020/05/29/la-huella-de-la-censura-franquista-la-primera-traduccion-espanola-de-1984-micaela-vazquez/</u>](https://vasoscomunicantes.ace-traductores.org/2020/05/29/la-huella-de-la-censura-franquista-la-primera-traduccion-espanola-de-1984-micaela-vazquez/)

53. La censura en la traducción. “1984” y el Régimen - Revista
    Contrapunto, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://revistacontrapunto.com/la-traduccion-censura-1984-y-el-regimen/</u>](https://revistacontrapunto.com/la-traduccion-censura-1984-y-el-regimen/)

54. Traducción, ideología y censura en la publicación de la obra de
    George Orwell en España: el caso de Nineteen Eighty - e-Repositori
    UPF, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://repositori.upf.edu/bitstreams/7288a33f-2a25-4b1f-a497-fc637d472477/download</u>](https://repositori.upf.edu/bitstreams/7288a33f-2a25-4b1f-a497-fc637d472477/download)

55. A Study of Three Chinese Translations of George Orwell's Nineteen
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://hub.hku.hk/bitstream/10722/40000/6/FullText.pdf</u>](https://hub.hku.hk/bitstream/10722/40000/6/FullText.pdf)

56. The Reception of George Orwell in Taiwan\* - Concentric: Literary
    and Cultural Studies, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.concentric-literature.url.tw/issues/Orienting%20Orwell%20Asian%20and%20Global%20Perspectives%20on%20George%20Orwell/6.pdf</u>](http://www.concentric-literature.url.tw/issues/Orienting%20Orwell%20Asian%20and%20Global%20Perspectives%20on%20George%20Orwell/6.pdf)

57. 1Q84 - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1Q84</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1Q84)

58. Ayman Almomani, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://hrcak.srce.hr/file/460876</u>](https://hrcak.srce.hr/file/460876)

59. 1984 (livro) – Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1984\_(livro)</u>](https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/1984_(livro))

60. Brazil: On-This-Day Thursday - Films Fatale, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.filmsfatale.com/blog/2020/2/19/brazil-on-this-day-thursday</u>](https://www.filmsfatale.com/blog/2020/2/19/brazil-on-this-day-thursday)

61. Brazil (1985) is a True Masterpiece : r/TrueFilm - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/TrueFilm/comments/h78ad1/brazil_1985_is_a_true_masterpiece/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/TrueFilm/comments/h78ad1/brazil_1985_is_a_true_masterpiece/)

62. 1984 to Brazil: From the pessimism of reality to the hope of
    dreams - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/248929285_1984_to_Brazil_From_the_pessimism_of_reality_to_the_hope_of_dreams</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/248929285_1984_to_Brazil_From_the_pessimism_of_reality_to_the_hope_of_dreams)

63. 1984 to Brazil: From Pessimism of Reality to the Hope of Dreams.,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://jan.ucc.nau.edu/rar/papers/RogersTPQ1990.pdf</u>](https://jan.ucc.nau.edu/rar/papers/RogersTPQ1990.pdf)

64. George Orwell's 1984: The Polish Chapter in Light of the PIASA
    Archives - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/312311564_George_Orwell's_1984_The_Polish_Chapter_in_Light_of_the_PIASA_Archives</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/312311564_George_Orwell's_1984_The_Polish_Chapter_in_Light_of_the_PIASA_Archives)

65. Quando la critica stroncò “1984” di Orwell, da Calvino a Togliatti -
    SoloLibri.net, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sololibri.net/critica-stronco-1984-di-Orwell-Calvino-Togliatti.html</u>](https://www.sololibri.net/critica-stronco-1984-di-Orwell-Calvino-Togliatti.html)

66. ORWELL G. - 1984. 1953. first Polish edition. - OneBid, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://one.bid/en/ksiazki-i-starodruki-orwell-g-rok-1984-1953-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie/1504474</u>](https://one.bid/en/ksiazki-i-starodruki-orwell-g-rok-1984-1953-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie/1504474)

67. Rok 1984 – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rok_1984</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rok_1984)

68. I Just Translated '1984' Into Russian. I'm Gasping for Air - The
    Moscow Times, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2019/11/26/i-just-translated-1984-into-russian-im-gasping-for-air-a68319</u>](https://www.themoscowtimes.com/2019/11/26/i-just-translated-1984-into-russian-im-gasping-for-air-a68319)

69. Martyrdom in Poland, 1984 (Chapter 5) - Political Self-Sacrifice,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/political-selfsacrifice/martyrdom-in-poland-1984/73BC4D7A7E87F4DA55C9CD60A33EE045</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/political-selfsacrifice/martyrdom-in-poland-1984/73BC4D7A7E87F4DA55C9CD60A33EE045)

70. Poland Timeline 1918-52 - The World at War, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>http://worldatwar.net/timeline/poland/18-52.html</u>](http://worldatwar.net/timeline/poland/18-52.html)

71. History of Poland (1939–1945) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Poland\_(1939%E2%80%931945)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Poland_(1939%E2%80%931945))

72. History of Poland (1945–1989) - Data Science Lab, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://dlab.epfl.ch/wikispeedia/wpcd/wp/h/History_of_Poland\_%25281945%25E2%2580%25931989%2529.htm</u>](https://dlab.epfl.ch/wikispeedia/wpcd/wp/h/History_of_Poland_%25281945%25E2%2580%25931989%2529.htm)

73. History of Poland (1945-1989) - New World Encyclopedia, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/History_of_Poland\_(1945-1989)</u>](https://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/History_of_Poland_(1945-1989))

74. Orwell według Lechonia (polska premiera) \| Archiwum Emigracji,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://apcz.umk.pl/AE/article/view/AE.2013.016</u>](https://apcz.umk.pl/AE/article/view/AE.2013.016)

75. Kultura (miesięcznik) – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kultura\_(miesi%C4%99cznik)</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kultura_(miesi%C4%99cznik))

76. What Does George Orwell's '1984' Mean in 2024?, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/what-does-george-orwells-1984-mean-in-2024-180984468/</u>](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/what-does-george-orwells-1984-mean-in-2024-180984468/)

77. (PDF) George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and
    Clandestine Receptions, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390689759_George_Orwell_and_Communist_Poland_Emigre_Official_and_Clandestine_Receptions</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390689759_George_Orwell_and_Communist_Poland_Emigre_Official_and_Clandestine_Receptions)

78. ORWELL G. - Rok 1984. 1953. Pierwsze polskie wydanie. - OneBid,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://onebid.pl/pl/ksiazki-i-starodruki-orwell-g-rok-1984-1953-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie/1582982</u>](https://onebid.pl/pl/ksiazki-i-starodruki-orwell-g-rok-1984-1953-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie/1582982)

79. ORWELL G. - Rok 1984. 1953. Pierwsze polskie wydanie. - OneBid,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://onebid.pl/pl/ksiazki-i-starodruki-orwell-g-rok-1984-1953-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie/1376157</u>](https://onebid.pl/pl/ksiazki-i-starodruki-orwell-g-rok-1984-1953-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie/1376157)

80. George Orwell „Rok 1984”: czy ta wizja świata może być aktualna?
    vol.2 - Radio Kampus, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://radiokampus.fm/aktualnosci/george-orwell-rok-1984-czy-ta-wizja-swiata-moze-byc-aktualna-vol.2</u>](https://radiokampus.fm/aktualnosci/george-orwell-rok-1984-czy-ta-wizja-swiata-moze-byc-aktualna-vol.2)

81. Inheritance Books: Zuzanna Krzemien, Curator East European
    Collections - Blogs, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blogs.bl.uk/european/2020/06/inheritance-books-zuzanna-krzemien-curator-east-european-collections.html</u>](https://blogs.bl.uk/european/2020/06/inheritance-books-zuzanna-krzemien-curator-east-european-collections.html)

82. George Orwell and Communist Poland by Krystyna Wieszczek \| migr©,
    Official and Clandestine Receptions \| 9781032409535 \| Booktopia,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.booktopia.com.au/george-orwell-and-communist-poland-krystyna-wieszczek/book/9781032409535.html</u>](https://www.booktopia.com.au/george-orwell-and-communist-poland-krystyna-wieszczek/book/9781032409535.html)

83. George Orwell and Communist Poland \| Émigré, Official and
    Clandestine, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/mono/10.4324/9781003355533/george-orwell-communist-poland-krystyna-wieszczek</u>](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/mono/10.4324/9781003355533/george-orwell-communist-poland-krystyna-wieszczek)

84. George Orwell and Communist Poland: Émigré, Official and ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360772566_George_Orwell_and_Communist_Poland_Emigre_Official_and_Clandestine_Receptions</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360772566_George_Orwell_and_Communist_Poland_Emigre_Official_and_Clandestine_Receptions)

85. Orwell and Solidarity, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://orwellsociety.com/orwell-and-solidarity/</u>](https://orwellsociety.com/orwell-and-solidarity/)

86. Rok 1984. Lektura z opracowaniem - Orwell George \| Książka w Empik,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.empik.com/rok-1984-lektura-z-opracowaniem-orwell-george,p1257950377,ksiazka-p</u>](https://www.empik.com/rok-1984-lektura-z-opracowaniem-orwell-george,p1257950377,ksiazka-p)

87. Rok 1984 - WolneLektury.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://wolnelektury.pl/katalog/lektura/orwell-rok-1984/</u>](https://wolnelektury.pl/katalog/lektura/orwell-rok-1984/)

88. Rok 1984. Lektura z opracowaniem George Orwell książka \|
    TaniaKsiazka.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/rok-1984-lektura-z-opracowaniem-george-orwell</u>](https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/rok-1984-lektura-z-opracowaniem-george-orwell)

89. Rok 1984 Lektura z opracowaniem Klasa 1-4 Liceum - Znak, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.znak.com.pl/p/rok-1984-lektura-z-opracowaniem-klasa-1-4-liceum-george-orwell-george-orwell-172529</u>](https://www.znak.com.pl/p/rok-1984-lektura-z-opracowaniem-klasa-1-4-liceum-george-orwell-george-orwell-172529)

90. ROK 1984, George Orwell \| matura 2025 - opracowanie i pytania ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.otouczelnie.pl/news/2224/Rok-1984-matura-2025</u>](https://www.otouczelnie.pl/news/2224/Rok-1984-matura-2025)

91. Rok 1984 – opracowanie – George Orwell – poezja.org, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://poezja.org/wz/zbior/Rok_1984/</u>](https://poezja.org/wz/zbior/Rok_1984/)

92. ustna matura rok 1984 - Klub Nauczyciela, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://klubnauczyciela.stentor.pl/files/produkty/pliki/matura-ustna-2023-rok-1984-opracowanie-zagadnien-ebook-baba-od-polskiego.pdf</u>](https://klubnauczyciela.stentor.pl/files/produkty/pliki/matura-ustna-2023-rok-1984-opracowanie-zagadnien-ebook-baba-od-polskiego.pdf)

93. Rafał Księżyk - „Fala. Rok 1984 i polski postpunk" - Zew Kultury
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://zewkultury.pl/ksiazka/rafal-ksiezyk-fala-rok-1984-i-polski-postpunk/</u>](https://zewkultury.pl/ksiazka/rafal-ksiezyk-fala-rok-1984-i-polski-postpunk/)

94. Otwieranie korytarzy w przyszłość i w przeszłość - IR2.info,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ir2.info/article/wywiad-otwieranie/</u>](https://ir2.info/article/wywiad-otwieranie/)

95. „Rok 1984” zakazany na Białorusi \| Aktualności \| Lubimyczytać.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/aktualnosci/17537/rok-1984-zakazany-na-bialorusi</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/aktualnosci/17537/rok-1984-zakazany-na-bialorusi)

96. "Rok 1984" miał być przestrogą. Dziś fabuła tej książki się ziszcza,
    a kamery są wszędzie wokół, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.komputerswiat.pl/artykuly/redakcyjne/rok-1984-mial-byc-przestroga-dzis-fabula-tej-ksiazki-sie-ziszcza-a-kamery-sa-wszedzie/9evjd0c</u>](https://www.komputerswiat.pl/artykuly/redakcyjne/rok-1984-mial-byc-przestroga-dzis-fabula-tej-ksiazki-sie-ziszcza-a-kamery-sa-wszedzie/9evjd0c)

97. Rok 1984 - George Orwell \| Książka w Lubimyczytac.pl - Opinie,
    oceny, ceny, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5190929/rok-1984</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5190929/rok-1984)

98. Rock & Rok 1984, czyli Wielki Brat na Scenie Monopolis - Life in
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lifein.pl/rock-rok-1984-czyli-wielki-brat-na-scenie-monopolis/</u>](https://lifein.pl/rock-rok-1984-czyli-wielki-brat-na-scenie-monopolis/)

99. Adaptations of Nineteen Eighty-Four - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_Nineteen_Eighty-Four</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_Nineteen_Eighty-Four)

100. Nineteen Eighty-Four (British TV programme) - Wikipedia, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nineteen_Eighty-Four\_(British_TV_programme)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nineteen_Eighty-Four_(British_TV_programme))

101. Televising the future: Nineteen Eighty-Four and the imagination of
     Nigel Kneale - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q6M-F3sEEKo</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q6M-F3sEEKo)

102. 1984 - Dramatic Publishing, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.dramaticpublishing.com/browse/1984</u>](https://www.dramaticpublishing.com/browse/1984)

103. 1984 by George Orwell adapted for the stage by Michael Gene
     Sullivan - Playscripts, Inc., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.playscripts.com/play/2535</u>](https://www.playscripts.com/play/2535)

104. Nineteen Eighty-Four (1953 - NBC) : George Orwell : Free ...,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://archive.org/details/NineteenEightyFour_1953</u>](https://archive.org/details/NineteenEightyFour_1953)

105. 1984 : the graphic novel - Brooklyn Public Library, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://discover.bklynlibrary.org/item?b=12494031</u>](https://discover.bklynlibrary.org/item?b=12494031)

106. 1984: the graphic novel - Grounds Coffee, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://groundsbhm.com/products/1984-the-graphic-novel</u>](https://groundsbhm.com/products/1984-the-graphic-novel)

107. store.steampowered.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://store.steampowered.com/app/2390780/1984/#:~:text=1984%20on%20Steam&text=1984%20is%20a%20first%2Dperson,Subnautica%2C%20Talos%20Principle%20and%20FTL.</u>](https://store.steampowered.com/app/2390780/1984/#:~:text=1984%20on%20Steam&text=1984%20is%20a%20first%2Dperson,Subnautica%2C%20Talos%20Principle%20and%20FTL.)

108. 1984 on Steam, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://store.steampowered.com/app/2390780/1984/</u>](https://store.steampowered.com/app/2390780/1984/)

109. 1984 by George Orwell - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLz_ZtyOWL9BTdAtiD3YxaAloQn_OnkvJW</u>](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLz_ZtyOWL9BTdAtiD3YxaAloQn_OnkvJW)

110. Nineteen Eighty-Four - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1Y6XYl2Nm19Le8CBfTgACLw3L8xwck45</u>](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL1Y6XYl2Nm19Le8CBfTgACLw3L8xwck45)

111. 1984 by George Orwell - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD_10keOX4eM5Y8Z_XvXeQSUct-xFJVzl</u>](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD_10keOX4eM5Y8Z_XvXeQSUct-xFJVzl)

112. 1984 Quotes by George Orwell - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/153313-1984</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/153313-1984)

113. Top 10 fake George Orwell quotations \| The Independent, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/top-10-fake-george-orwell-quotations-b2162185.html</u>](https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/top-10-fake-george-orwell-quotations-b2162185.html)

114. Things that Orwell did NOT write or say, but are quoted as his
     anyway. - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/snnk2n/things_that_orwell_did_not_write_or_say_but_are/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/snnk2n/things_that_orwell_did_not_write_or_say_but_are/)

115. Things that Orwell did NOT write or say, but are quoted as his
     anyway. : r/books - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/snm0l3/things_that_orwell_did_not_write_or_say_but_are/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/snm0l3/things_that_orwell_did_not_write_or_say_but_are/)

116. The Roles Of Women In George Orwell's 1984 - 1157 Words \| Cram,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.cram.com/essay/The-Roles-Of-Women-In-George-Orwells/FCCFRJMUP6</u>](https://www.cram.com/essay/The-Roles-Of-Women-In-George-Orwells/FCCFRJMUP6)

117. Criticism Towards The Portrayal of Women in George Orwell's 1984 -
     UPenn Call for Papers, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://call-for-papers.sas.upenn.edu/cfp/2023/07/05/criticism-towards-the-portrayal-of-women-in-george-orwell%E2%80%99s-1984</u>](https://call-for-papers.sas.upenn.edu/cfp/2023/07/05/criticism-towards-the-portrayal-of-women-in-george-orwell%E2%80%99s-1984)

118. 'It was always the women': Misogyny in 1984. \| by Meia \| Medium,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://medium.com/@Meia/it-was-always-the-women-misogyny-in-1984-5bb9228545da</u>](https://medium.com/@Meia/it-was-always-the-women-misogyny-in-1984-5bb9228545da)

119. Queer Themes in 1984, an essay by Me (warning: long post) : r/1984,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/1984/comments/n4zgtf/queer_themes_in_1984_an_essay_by_me_warning_long/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/1984/comments/n4zgtf/queer_themes_in_1984_an_essay_by_me_warning_long/)

120. New '1984' Foreword Includes Warning About 'Problematic'
     Characters - Newsweek, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.newsweek.com/new-1984-foreword-includes-warning-about-problematic-characters-2082192</u>](https://www.newsweek.com/new-1984-foreword-includes-warning-about-problematic-characters-2082192)

121. Nineteen Eighty-Four -- Part I - George Orwell, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://orwell.ru/library/novels/1984/english/en_p_1</u>](https://orwell.ru/library/novels/1984/english/en_p_1)

122. George orwell and the idea of Sadism in Nineteen Eighty-Four: A
     psychoanalytic perspective \| International Journal of Recent
     Advances in Multidisciplinary Research (IJRAMR), otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ijramr.com/issue/george-orwell-and-idea-sadism-nineteen-eighty-four-psychoanalytic-perspective</u>](https://www.ijramr.com/issue/george-orwell-and-idea-sadism-nineteen-eighty-four-psychoanalytic-perspective)

123. Nineteen Eighty-Four Portrays Totalitarianism and Mind Control \|
     EBSCO Research Starters, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/nineteen-eighty-four-portrays-totalitarianism-and-mind</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/nineteen-eighty-four-portrays-totalitarianism-and-mind)

124. The Psychoanalysis of 1984 - 1019 Words - Bartleby.com, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bartleby.com/essay/The-Psychoanalysis-of-1984-P3FL46SQUDSX</u>](https://www.bartleby.com/essay/The-Psychoanalysis-of-1984-P3FL46SQUDSX)

125. 'The few cubic centimetres inside your skull': a neurological
     reading of George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four - PubMed,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29941664/</u>](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29941664/)

126. george orwell and the idea of sadism in nineteen eighty- four: a
     psychoanalytic perspective, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/379443394_GEORGE_ORWELL_AND_THE_IDEA_OF_SADISM_IN_NINETEEN_EIGHTY-\_FOUR_A_PSYCHOANALYTIC_PERSPECTIVE</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/379443394_GEORGE_ORWELL_AND_THE_IDEA_OF_SADISM_IN_NINETEEN_EIGHTY-_FOUR_A_PSYCHOANALYTIC_PERSPECTIVE)

127. research article george orwell and the idea of sadism in nineteen
     eighty- four: a psychoanalytic perspective, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.ijramr.com/sites/default/files/issues-pdf/5161_0.pdf</u>](https://www.ijramr.com/sites/default/files/issues-pdf/5161_0.pdf)

128. the psychological consequences of totalitarian - SATHYABAMA,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://sist.sathyabama.ac.in/sist_naac/aqar_2022_2023/documents/1.3.4/baenglish_batch%20no.26.pdf</u>](https://sist.sathyabama.ac.in/sist_naac/aqar_2022_2023/documents/1.3.4/baenglish_batch%20no.26.pdf)

129. KARE » Submission » Ecopsychological Perspectives on George
     Orwell's 1984: Exploring Nature's Deprivation and Restoration -
     DergiPark, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://dergipark.org.tr/en/pub/kare/issue/92417/1700853</u>](https://dergipark.org.tr/en/pub/kare/issue/92417/1700853)

130. Ecopsychological Perspectives on George Orwell's 1984: Exploring
     Nature's Deprivation and Restoration - ResearchGate, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/393173482_Ecopsychological_Perspectives_on_George_Orwell's_1984_Exploring_Nature's_Deprivation_and_Restoration</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/393173482_Ecopsychological_Perspectives_on_George_Orwell's_1984_Exploring_Nature's_Deprivation_and_Restoration)

131. Note from the Editors \| Environmental History: Vol 29, No 1,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/728083</u>](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/728083)

132. Nature as an uncontrolled space in George Orwell's Nineteen
     Eighty-four and Aldous Huxley's Brave New World - Lund University
     Publications, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://lup.lub.lu.se/student-papers/record/9138921/file/9147007.pdf</u>](https://lup.lub.lu.se/student-papers/record/9138921/file/9147007.pdf)

133. Nature as an uncontrolled space in George Orwell's 'Nineteen
     Eighty-four' and Aldous Huxley's 'Brave New World' \| Lund
     University, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.lunduniversity.lu.se/lup/publication/9138921</u>](https://www.lunduniversity.lu.se/lup/publication/9138921)

134. Kare International Journal of Comparative Literature - DergiPark,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://dergipark.org.tr/en/download/article-file/4877122</u>](https://dergipark.org.tr/en/download/article-file/4877122)

135. The New Newspeak: How Social Justice is Politicizing Language -
     Goldwater Institute, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.goldwaterinstitute.org/the-new-newspeak-how-social-justice-is-politicizing-language/</u>](https://www.goldwaterinstitute.org/the-new-newspeak-how-social-justice-is-politicizing-language/)

136. Why Would Some Feminist Activists Want to Ban Nineteen Eighty-Four,
     and Why Shouldn't They? - Paradigm Press, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.paradigmpress.org/SSSH/article/view/971</u>](https://www.paradigmpress.org/SSSH/article/view/971)

137. Nineteen EIghty-Four (1984) by George Orwell- Book Review - Shelf
     Reflection, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.shelfreflection.com/blog/nineteen-eighty-four</u>](https://www.shelfreflection.com/blog/nineteen-eighty-four)

138. Themes of 1984 by George Orwell - Easy Litt, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://easylitt.blogspot.com/2019/05/themes-of-1984-George-Orwell.html</u>](https://easylitt.blogspot.com/2019/05/themes-of-1984-George-Orwell.html)

139. The secrets of Nineteen Eighty-Four - International Socialism,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://isj.org.uk/the-secrets-of-nineteen-eighty-four/</u>](https://isj.org.uk/the-secrets-of-nineteen-eighty-four/)

140. Manuscript of 1984 - Brown University Library, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://library.brown.edu/exhibits/archive/orwell/siegel.html</u>](https://library.brown.edu/exhibits/archive/orwell/siegel.html)

141. 1984 (The Manuscript Facsimile) - Heywood Hill, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.heywoodhill.com/shop/1984-the-manuscript-facsimile</u>](https://www.heywoodhill.com/shop/1984-the-manuscript-facsimile)

142. Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four - Embellished Manuscripts Collection -
     Hardcover Journals, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.paperblanks.com/en/product/journals/orwell-nineteen-eighty-four/pb5456-6</u>](https://www.paperblanks.com/en/product/journals/orwell-nineteen-eighty-four/pb5456-6)

143. Homage to Catalonia - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homage_to_Catalonia</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homage_to_Catalonia)

144. ORWELL- ROK 1984 wyd.1 \| Antykwariat internetowy Sobieski,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://antyksobieski.pl/orwell-rok-1984-wyd-1-18610.html</u>](https://antyksobieski.pl/orwell-rok-1984-wyd-1-18610.html)

145. Dominika Śledziona - Translation as a literary interpretation. A
     translation study of selected English dystopias - UMCS, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.umcs.pl/pl/szukaj-redirect,510559.html</u>](https://www.umcs.pl/pl/szukaj-redirect,510559.html)

146. Orwell on Poland and Political Controversies of his Time -
     University of Southampton, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://cdn.southampton.ac.uk/assets/imported/transforms/content-block/UsefulDownloads_Download/449F51D4C8234B7E9FB9ECD574D6AE51/Krystyna%20Wieszczek%20-%20Orwell%20on%20Poland%20and%20Political%20Controversies%20of%20his....pdf</u>](https://cdn.southampton.ac.uk/assets/imported/transforms/content-block/UsefulDownloads_Download/449F51D4C8234B7E9FB9ECD574D6AE51/Krystyna%20Wieszczek%20-%20Orwell%20on%20Poland%20and%20Political%20Controversies%20of%20his....pdf)

147. George Orwell and Communist Poland - Lackawanna College Online
     Bookstore, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://lackawanna.ecampus.com/george-orwell-communist-poland-krystyna/bk/9781032409535</u>](https://lackawanna.ecampus.com/george-orwell-communist-poland-krystyna/bk/9781032409535)

148. George Orwell and Poland: Émigré, official and clandestine
     receptions - ePrints Soton, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/457050/</u>](https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/457050/)

149. Rok 1984 - George Orwell - Leszek Andrzejewski, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://andrzejewski.siedlce.pl/rok-1984.html</u>](https://andrzejewski.siedlce.pl/rok-1984.html)

150. George Orwell, Rok 1984 - współczesna interpretacja - 3telnia,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://3telnia.pl/george-orwell-rok-1984-wspolczesna-interpretacja/</u>](https://3telnia.pl/george-orwell-rok-1984-wspolczesna-interpretacja/)

151. W 2021 witamy rok 1984 – MRSIP, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://mrsip.pl/w-2021-witamy-1984/</u>](https://mrsip.pl/w-2021-witamy-1984/)

152. Na prowincji rodzi się nowa fala. Przedpremierowy fragment książki
     „Fala. Rok 1984 i polski postpunk” Rafała Księżyka - Booklips.pl,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://booklips.pl/czytelnia/fragmenty-ksiazek/na-prowincji-rodzi-sie-nowa-fala-przedpremierowy-fragment-ksiazki-fala-rok-1984-i-polski-postpunk-rafala-ksiezyka/</u>](https://booklips.pl/czytelnia/fragmenty-ksiazek/na-prowincji-rodzi-sie-nowa-fala-przedpremierowy-fragment-ksiazki-fala-rok-1984-i-polski-postpunk-rafala-ksiezyka/)

153. Fala. Rok 1984 i polski postpunk - Świat Książki, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.swiatksiazki.pl/fala-rok-1984-i-polski-postpunk-7419776-ksiazka.html</u>](https://www.swiatksiazki.pl/fala-rok-1984-i-polski-postpunk-7419776-ksiazka.html)

154. Tomasz Mirkowicz, tłumacz Roku 1984 George'a Orwella, i jego
     opowiadanie pt. Tunel - Repozytorium Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl/jspui/bitstream/11320/11131/1/M_Kotowska_Kachel_Tomasz_Mirkowicz_Tlumacz%20Roku_1984_George%27a_Orwella.pdf</u>](https://repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl/jspui/bitstream/11320/11131/1/M_Kotowska_Kachel_Tomasz_Mirkowicz_Tlumacz%20Roku_1984_George%27a_Orwella.pdf)

155. KRYSTYNA WIESZCZEK DE OLIVEIRA - O wczesnych relacjach Orwella z
     Polską, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl/jspui/bitstream/11320/11132/1/K_Wieszczek_de_Oliveira_O_wczesnych_relacjach_Orwella.pdf</u>](https://repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl/jspui/bitstream/11320/11132/1/K_Wieszczek_de_Oliveira_O_wczesnych_relacjach_Orwella.pdf)

156. 100 polskich płyt 80's POP (1980-1989) - moje ulubione -
     Alternativepop.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.alternativepop.pl/rankingi/100-polskich-plyt-80s-pop-1980-1989-moje-ulubione</u>](https://www.alternativepop.pl/rankingi/100-polskich-plyt-80s-pop-1980-1989-moje-ulubione)

157. NOWOMOWA JAKO SPOSÓB NA OGRANICZENIE WOLNOŚCI CZŁOWIEKA \|
     opracowanie - pytania jawne matura - OtoUczelnie, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.otouczelnie.pl/artykul/33817/Nowomowa-jako-sposob-na-ograniczenie-wolnosci-czlowieka</u>](https://www.otouczelnie.pl/artykul/33817/Nowomowa-jako-sposob-na-ograniczenie-wolnosci-czlowieka)

158. "1984." Literatura i kultura schyłkowego PRL-u - Repozytorium
     Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl/jspui/bitstream/11320/11228/3/1984_Literatura_i_kultura_schylkowego_PRL_u.pdf</u>](https://repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl/jspui/bitstream/11320/11228/3/1984_Literatura_i_kultura_schylkowego_PRL_u.pdf)

159. Exchanging Glances with Big Brother: Diffuse Surveillance in
     Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four and Today - Cairn, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://shs.cairn.info/revue-sciences-et-actions-sociales-2019-2-page-10?lang=en</u>](https://shs.cairn.info/revue-sciences-et-actions-sociales-2019-2-page-10?lang=en)

160. Language, Nineteen eighty-four, and 1989 \| Language in Society \|
     Cambridge Core, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/language-in-society/article/language-nineteen-eightyfour-and-1989/5A967C1B7D3A8340BCDB05041DC073F4</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/language-in-society/article/language-nineteen-eightyfour-and-1989/5A967C1B7D3A8340BCDB05041DC073F4)

161. Winston's Redemption in Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://bcpublication.org/index.php/FHSS/article/download/5059/4915/4866</u>](https://bcpublication.org/index.php/FHSS/article/download/5059/4915/4866)

162. www.rider.edu, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.rider.edu/sites/default/files/2021-03/202103_BHP_203SampleSyllabus.docx</u>](https://www.rider.edu/sites/default/files/2021-03/202103_BHP_203SampleSyllabus.docx)

163. Connecting Nineteen Eighty-Four to Today - Teachers Institute of
     Philadelphia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://theteachersinstitute.org/curriculum_unit/connecting-nineteen-eighty-four-to-today/</u>](https://theteachersinstitute.org/curriculum_unit/connecting-nineteen-eighty-four-to-today/)

164. 1984 New College Review - The University of Alabama, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://newcollegereview.ua.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/08/NCR-1984_access.pdf</u>](https://newcollegereview.ua.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/08/NCR-1984_access.pdf)

165. Totalitarian Novels \| Hillsdale College Online Courses, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://online.hillsdale.edu/courses/promo/totalitarian-novels</u>](https://online.hillsdale.edu/courses/promo/totalitarian-novels)

166. George Orwell and Nineteen Eighty-Four - The Open University,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.open.edu/openlearn/society-politics-law/george-orwell-and-nineteen-eighty-four/content-section-1</u>](https://www.open.edu/openlearn/society-politics-law/george-orwell-and-nineteen-eighty-four/content-section-1)

167. "Not Death, but Annihilation": Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four and
     the Catastrophe of Englishness", otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://english.washington.edu/research/publications/not-death-annihilation-orwells-nineteen-eighty-four-and-catastrophe-0</u>](https://english.washington.edu/research/publications/not-death-annihilation-orwells-nineteen-eighty-four-and-catastrophe-0)

168. George Orwell's Critical Reception - Salem Press, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://salempress.com/Media/SalemPress/samples/Orwell%20Sample.pdf</u>](https://salempress.com/Media/SalemPress/samples/Orwell%20Sample.pdf)

169. Review: Orwell (2), otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://mtprof.msun.edu/spr1992/Jonesrev.html</u>](https://mtprof.msun.edu/spr1992/Jonesrev.html)

170. Bloom's Modern Critical Guides: Orwell's 1984 - Bishop Allen
     Library, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://bishopallenlibrary.weebly.com/uploads/1/1/0/4/11040429/1984-blooms-guides.pdf</u>](https://bishopallenlibrary.weebly.com/uploads/1/1/0/4/11040429/1984-blooms-guides.pdf)

171. A Discourse Analysis of Representations of Disabled Characters in
     Scripted Television Programs - The Aquila Digital Community,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://aquila.usm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2893&context=dissertations</u>](https://aquila.usm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2893&context=dissertations)

172. www.ebsco.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/nineteen-eighty-four-analysis-major-characters#:~:text=The%20protagonist%2C%20Winston%20Smith%2C%20is,union%20when%20they%20remain%20childless.</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/nineteen-eighty-four-analysis-major-characters#:~:text=The%20protagonist%2C%20Winston%20Smith%2C%20is,union%20when%20they%20remain%20childless.)

173. Nineteen Eighty-Four: Analysis of Major Characters \| EBSCO
     Research Starters, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/nineteen-eighty-four-analysis-major-characters</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/nineteen-eighty-four-analysis-major-characters)

174. How “Interested” Criticism Fueled the Formulation of Nineteen
     Eighty-Four's Cultural Afterlife - Clemson OPEN, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://open.clemson.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4651&context=all_theses</u>](https://open.clemson.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4651&context=all_theses)

175. Dystopian Trends in Modern Arabic Literature - DiVA portal,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1280884/FULLTEXT01.pdf</u>](http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1280884/FULLTEXT01.pdf)

176. Recensione: "1984" di George Orwell - Rosa del Deserto - Weebly,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://rosadeldeserto.weebly.com/leggete-per-vivere/recensione-1984-di-george-orwell</u>](https://rosadeldeserto.weebly.com/leggete-per-vivere/recensione-1984-di-george-orwell)

177. 1984 (romanzo di George Orwell) \| Recensione - Terre di Confine
     Magazine, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.terrediconfine.eu/1984-romanzo/</u>](https://www.terrediconfine.eu/1984-romanzo/)

178. fondazione luigi firpo - centro di studi sul pensiero politico -
     IRIS-AperTO, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://iris.unito.it/bitstream/2318/104717/1/Antistalinismo.pdf</u>](https://iris.unito.it/bitstream/2318/104717/1/Antistalinismo.pdf)

179. "IL MITO GRECO" E "1984" DI ORWELL: IL "CHI E' PIU' FORTE COMANDA"
     E "LA VOGLIA DI FASCISMO". Luciano Canfora e Tommaso Pincio
     evidenziano, contemporaneamente (senza volerlo), il "lato oscuro"
     della tradizione europea - a cura di Federico La Sala - \[La Voce
     di Fiore\], otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.lavocedifiore.org/SPIP/article.php3?id_article=4192</u>](https://www.lavocedifiore.org/SPIP/article.php3?id_article=4192)

180. "1984" Analisi del romanzo di George Orwell a cura di Michele
     Ortore - Progetto Babele, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.progettobabele.it/rubriche/showrac.php?id=4170</u>](https://www.progettobabele.it/rubriche/showrac.php?id=4170)

181. The Japanese media and its Orwellian nature - Japan Today,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://japantoday.com/category/features/opinions/the-japanese-media-and-its-orwellian-nature</u>](https://japantoday.com/category/features/opinions/the-japanese-media-and-its-orwellian-nature)

182. Big Brother, doublethink, thoughtcrime & memory holes: George
     Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four, a 1984 Prometheus Hall of Fame
     winner for Best Classic Fiction - Libertarian Futurist Society,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.lfs.org/blog/big-brother-truth-doublethink-thoughtcrime-newspeak-memory-holes-socialism-liberalism-liberty-and-tyranny-an-appreciation-of-george-orwells-nineteen-eighty-four-a-1984-prometheus-ha/</u>](https://www.lfs.org/blog/big-brother-truth-doublethink-thoughtcrime-newspeak-memory-holes-socialism-liberalism-liberty-and-tyranny-an-appreciation-of-george-orwells-nineteen-eighty-four-a-1984-prometheus-ha/)

183. The best George Orwell quotes from 1984, Animal Farm and more - Pan
     Macmillan, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.panmacmillan.com/blogs/literary/george-orwell-quotes-1984-animal-farm</u>](https://www.panmacmillan.com/blogs/literary/george-orwell-quotes-1984-animal-farm)

184. Read TIME's Original Review of 'Nineteen Eighty-Four', otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://time.com/3903841/review-nineteen-eighty-four-history/</u>](https://time.com/3903841/review-nineteen-eighty-four-history/)

185. Banned Books Week "1984" by George Orwell Review - The George ...,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://thegeorgeanne.com/32762/uncategorized/banned-books-week-1984-by-george-orwell-review/</u>](https://thegeorgeanne.com/32762/uncategorized/banned-books-week-1984-by-george-orwell-review/)

186. '1984': How George Orwell's Big Brother was born during the Spanish
     Civil War \| Culture, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://english.elpais.com/culture/2022-11-26/1984-how-george-orwells-big-brother-was-born-during-the-spanish-civil-war.html</u>](https://english.elpais.com/culture/2022-11-26/1984-how-george-orwells-big-brother-was-born-during-the-spanish-civil-war.html)

187. Homage to Motihari? : George Orwell's Indian roots - Oxbridge
     Applications, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://oxbridgeapplications.com/kyc/homage-to-motihari-george-orwells-indian-roots/</u>](https://oxbridgeapplications.com/kyc/homage-to-motihari-george-orwells-indian-roots/)

188. My Favorite Banned Books (and Why) – West44Books Blog, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.west44books.com/blog/2023/05/03/wil-mara-new-jersey-author-year-banned-books-orwell-bradbury-lee-salinger/</u>](https://www.west44books.com/blog/2023/05/03/wil-mara-new-jersey-author-year-banned-books-orwell-bradbury-lee-salinger/)

189. 1984, George Orwell - Livros do Brasil, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.livrosdobrasil.pt/produtos/ficha/1984/24456577</u>](https://www.livrosdobrasil.pt/produtos/ficha/1984/24456577)

190. 1984, George Orwell - Porto Editora, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.portoeditora.pt/produtos/ficha/1984/23935842</u>](https://www.portoeditora.pt/produtos/ficha/1984/23935842)

191. George Orwell - Bertrand Livreiros - livraria Online, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bertrand.pt/autor/george-orwell/4729963</u>](https://www.bertrand.pt/autor/george-orwell/4729963)

192. The Orwell Prizes Bookshop UK, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://uk.bookshop.org/shop/theorwellprizes</u>](https://uk.bookshop.org/shop/theorwellprizes)

193. Critical Insights: Nineteen Eighty-Four - Salem Press, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://salempress.com/critical_insights_nineteen_eighty-four</u>](https://salempress.com/critical_insights_nineteen_eighty-four)

194. “This is just like 1984!”. Referencing “1984” has become a staple…
     \| by Joan Westenberg - Medium, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://medium.com/westenberg/this-is-just-like-1984-83de830015a3</u>](https://medium.com/westenberg/this-is-just-like-1984-83de830015a3)

195. 1984 Is Not Just a Dystopian Novel Anymore - Ed Post, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.edpost.com/stories/1984-is-not-just-a-dystopian-novel-anymore</u>](https://www.edpost.com/stories/1984-is-not-just-a-dystopian-novel-anymore)

196. Social Justice Groupthink - The Hudson Review, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://hudsonreview.com/2021/05/social-justice-groupthink/</u>](https://hudsonreview.com/2021/05/social-justice-groupthink/)

197. Where does the 1984 timeline differ from our own? - Reddit,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/1984/comments/132ckla/where_does_the_1984_timeline_differ_from_our_own/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/1984/comments/132ckla/where_does_the_1984_timeline_differ_from_our_own/)

198. Corruption Of Youth In George Orwell's 1984 - 1160 Words \|
     Bartleby, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Corruption-Of-Youth-In-George-Orwells-1984-FK6C6ZLQVA6</u>](https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Corruption-Of-Youth-In-George-Orwells-1984-FK6C6ZLQVA6)

199. "1984" prepared me for adulthood - Salon.com, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.salon.com/2013/10/30/1984_prepared_me_for_adulthood_partner/</u>](https://www.salon.com/2013/10/30/1984_prepared_me_for_adulthood_partner/)

200. YOUth Review: 1984 by George Orwell \| Thunder Bay Public Library,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tbpl.ca/blogs/post/youth-review-1984-by-george-orwell/</u>](https://www.tbpl.ca/blogs/post/youth-review-1984-by-george-orwell/)

201. 1984 Inspired Art - Pinterest, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.pinterest.com/ideas/1984-inspired-art/936243224651/</u>](https://www.pinterest.com/ideas/1984-inspired-art/936243224651/)

202. 1984 George Orwell Paintings for Sale - Fine Art America,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://fineartamerica.com/art/paintings/1984+george+orwell</u>](https://fineartamerica.com/art/paintings/1984+george+orwell)

203. Made a playlist inspired by George Orwell's 1984. : r/spotify -
     Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/spotify/comments/5ozsjw/made_a_playlist_inspired_by_george_orwells_1984/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/spotify/comments/5ozsjw/made_a_playlist_inspired_by_george_orwells_1984/)

204. 10 Punk Songs Influenced by George Orwell's “1984” - Dying Scene,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://dyingscene.com/archive/10-punk-songs-influenced-by-george-orwells-1984/</u>](https://dyingscene.com/archive/10-punk-songs-influenced-by-george-orwells-1984/)

205. Category:Music based on Nineteen Eighty-Four - Wikipedia,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Music_based_on_Nineteen_Eighty-Four</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Music_based_on_Nineteen_Eighty-Four)

206. Nineteen Eighty-Four (1984) - PASSIA, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://publications.passia.org/product/nineteen-eighty-four-1984/</u>](https://publications.passia.org/product/nineteen-eighty-four-1984/)

207. 1984 (Arabic) - Catch of the Day Books, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://catchofthedaybooks.com/product/1984-arabic/</u>](https://catchofthedaybooks.com/product/1984-arabic/)

208. 1984 (Arabic Edition) by George Orwell - Goodreads, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/51516233</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/51516233)

209. Notes on Nineteen Eighty Four - India Bookworld, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://indiabookworld.ca/products/notes-on-nineteen-eighty-four</u>](https://indiabookworld.ca/products/notes-on-nineteen-eighty-four)

210. Famous "1984" and "Animal Farm" writer George Orwell was born in
     Motihari, Bihar, in India. His birthplace is now a museum. :
     r/Indianbooks - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/Indianbooks/comments/1l6b0c9/famous_1984_and_animal_farm_writer_george_orwell/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/Indianbooks/comments/1l6b0c9/famous_1984_and_animal_farm_writer_george_orwell/)

211. 1984 (es) - Livraria Lello, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.livrarialello.pt/en/store/exclusives/1984-es-9789899135017</u>](https://www.livrarialello.pt/en/store/exclusives/1984-es-9789899135017)

212. 1984 (Portuguese Edition) - George Orwell: 9789897111228 -
     AbeBooks, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.abebooks.com/9789897111228/1984-Portuguese-Edition-George-Orwell-9897111220/plp</u>](https://www.abebooks.com/9789897111228/1984-Portuguese-Edition-George-Orwell-9897111220/plp)

213. When people say "1984 was banned in the us" what are they talking
     about? - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/NoStupidQuestions/comments/1bbbv3r/when_people_say_1984_was_banned_in_the_us_what/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/NoStupidQuestions/comments/1bbbv3r/when_people_say_1984_was_banned_in_the_us_what/)

214. George Orwell's "1984" BANNED in High Schools : r/Capitalism -
     Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/Capitalism/comments/tqtph6/george_orwells_1984_banned_in_high_schools/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/Capitalism/comments/tqtph6/george_orwells_1984_banned_in_high_schools/)

215. George Orwell - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Orwell</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Orwell)

216. The Orwell Tour - The Book Trail, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.thebooktrail.com/book-trails/the-orwell-tour/</u>](https://www.thebooktrail.com/book-trails/the-orwell-tour/)

217. The Orwell Tour (Hardback) - Icon Books, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.iconbooks.com/ib-title/the-orwell-tour/</u>](https://www.iconbooks.com/ib-title/the-orwell-tour/)

218. "Rok 1984" George'a Orwell'a, czyli najlepsza książka, która
     otwiera oczy - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3tMTR5epp0</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3tMTR5epp0)

219. \- YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/hashtag/ma%C5%82ekobietki</u>](https://www.youtube.com/hashtag/ma%C5%82ekobietki)

220. "Wróć przed zmrokiem" straszy bardziej od KINGA?! - YouTube,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bl8xPCNb6vA</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bl8xPCNb6vA)

221. Rok 1984: Refleksje z lektury George'a Orwella \| TikTok,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@julios.books/video/7463502060432952598</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@julios.books/video/7463502060432952598)

222. Stretching the Face of Dystopia: The Illusion of Precision in
     Brazil - IU Blogs, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://blogs.iu.edu/establishingshot/2024/06/03/stretching-the-face-of-dystopia-the-illusion-of-precision-in-brazil/</u>](https://blogs.iu.edu/establishingshot/2024/06/03/stretching-the-face-of-dystopia-the-illusion-of-precision-in-brazil/)

223. George Orwell - Literary Tours of England, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://literarytoursengland.com/george-orwell/</u>](https://literarytoursengland.com/george-orwell/)

224. George Orwell: Nineteen Eighty-Four - London Fictions, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.londonfictions.com/george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four.html</u>](https://www.londonfictions.com/george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four.html)

225. Member Events - The Orwell Society, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://orwellsociety.com/member-benefits/events/</u>](https://orwellsociety.com/member-benefits/events/)

226. George Orwell — Free and self-guided walking tours around LONDON,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.walkmeblog.com/london-walks/tag/George+Orwell</u>](https://www.walkmeblog.com/london-walks/tag/George+Orwell)

227. Orwell's 1984 was not a dystopian novel/movie, but a bizzaro utopia
     used to illustrate how the most idealistic society is in fact a
     dystopia - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/FanTheories/comments/anoo0b/orwells_1984_was_not_a_dystopian_novelmovie_but_a/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/FanTheories/comments/anoo0b/orwells_1984_was_not_a_dystopian_novelmovie_but_a/)

228. Putting People Before Disabilities - OU Life - Orthodox Union,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ou.org/life/health/putting-people-before-disabilities/</u>](https://www.ou.org/life/health/putting-people-before-disabilities/)

229. Commentary On George Orwell's 1984 - 652 Words - Bartleby.com,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Commentary-On-George-Orwells-1984-FC4SWM7NP9V</u>](https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Commentary-On-George-Orwells-1984-FC4SWM7NP9V)

230. George Orwell \| British Museum, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/term/BIOG40734</u>](https://www.britishmuseum.org/collection/term/BIOG40734)

231. George Orwell House, Hertfordshire - Book Tickets & Tours \|
     GetYourGuide, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.getyourguide.com/en-gb/george-orwell-house-l225015/</u>](https://www.getyourguide.com/en-gb/george-orwell-house-l225015/)

232. George Orwell's London, Mapped, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://londonist.com/london/maps/george-orwell-s-london-mapped</u>](https://londonist.com/london/maps/george-orwell-s-london-mapped)

233. Past Lives: George Orwell in London \| English Heritage, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.english-heritage.org.uk/members-area/past-lives/george-orwell/</u>](https://www.english-heritage.org.uk/members-area/past-lives/george-orwell/)

234. Nineteen Eighty-Four - Easton Press, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.eastonpress.com/all-categories/sci-fi-and-fantasy/nineteen-eighty-four-3815004.html</u>](https://www.eastonpress.com/all-categories/sci-fi-and-fantasy/nineteen-eighty-four-3815004.html)

235. George Orwell T-Shirts for Sale - TeePublic, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.teepublic.com/t-shirts/george-orwell</u>](https://www.teepublic.com/t-shirts/george-orwell)

236. Nineteen Eighty Four T-Shirts for Sale - Redbubble, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.redbubble.com/shop/nineteen+eighty+four+t-shirts</u>](https://www.redbubble.com/shop/nineteen+eighty+four+t-shirts)

237. Things to Do on Jura: Follow in the footsteps of George Orwell -
     Wild About Argyll, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.wildaboutargyll.co.uk/blogs/follow-in-the-footsteps-of-george-orwell-and-make-a-journey-to-jura/</u>](https://www.wildaboutargyll.co.uk/blogs/follow-in-the-footsteps-of-george-orwell-and-make-a-journey-to-jura/)

238. Isle of Jura - Holidays & Breaks \| VisitScotland, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.visitscotland.com/places-to-go/islands/isle-jura</u>](https://www.visitscotland.com/places-to-go/islands/isle-jura)

239. Guide To Jura, Scotland: Follow In George Orwell's Footsteps With
     The Top Places To Visit And Things To Do There - Outlook Traveller,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.outlooktraveller.com/destinations/international/guide-to-jura-scotland-follow-in-george-orwells-footsteps-with-the-top-places-to-visit-and-things-to-do-there</u>](https://www.outlooktraveller.com/destinations/international/guide-to-jura-scotland-follow-in-george-orwells-footsteps-with-the-top-places-to-visit-and-things-to-do-there)

240. Jura: Visiting the Scottish island that spawned George Orwell's
     1984 \| The National, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.thenational.scot/culture/20058179.jura-visiting-scottish-island-spawned-george-orwells-1984/</u>](https://www.thenational.scot/culture/20058179.jura-visiting-scottish-island-spawned-george-orwells-1984/)

241. Isle of Jura - Scottish Islands Passport, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://islands.scot/blog/isle-of-jura/</u>](https://islands.scot/blog/isle-of-jura/)

242. George Orwell Discovery Walk - Pipsticks Walks, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.pipstickswalks.co.uk/book-walk/in-the-footsteps-of-george-orwell</u>](https://www.pipstickswalks.co.uk/book-walk/in-the-footsteps-of-george-orwell)

243. Bohemian Bloomsbury - London Walks, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.walks.com/our-walks/literary-london-walking-tour/</u>](https://www.walks.com/our-walks/literary-london-walking-tour/)

244. Private Islington Tours - London Guided Walks, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://londonguidedwalks.co.uk/private-islington-tours/</u>](https://londonguidedwalks.co.uk/private-islington-tours/)
