# An Enduring Voyage: The Global Resonances and Polish Reception of Robert Louis Stevenson's Treasure Island

## Part I: Genesis and Context of a Global Phenomenon

The emergence of Robert Louis Stevenson's *Treasure Island* as a
cornerstone of modern adventure fiction is a story rooted in a profound
paradox of the Victorian era: the intricate relationship between the
sanctified domestic sphere and the relentless drive for global
expansion. The novel's creation, born from a private family game, tapped
into a deep reservoir of cultural nostalgia, imperial fantasy, and a
rapidly evolving literary marketplace. It was a unique confluence of the
personal and the political, the domestic and the global, which set the
stage for its eventual voyage into the international literary canon.
Understanding this genesis is crucial to appreciating the novel's
complex textual layers and its remarkable capacity for cultural
adaptation across the world.

### The Author, the Boy, and the Map: A Domestic Origin

The narrative of *Treasure Island*'s creation is almost as famous as the
novel itself, a testament to the power of a simple, imaginative act. The
story began not in the tumultuous environment of the high seas, but
during a rainy holiday in Braemar, Scotland, in the late summer of
1881.<sup>1</sup> Confined indoors and recuperating from a persistent
illness that plagued him throughout his life, Robert Louis Stevenson
sought to entertain his twelve-year-old stepson, Lloyd
Osbourne.<sup>2</sup> Together, they began to paint a map of an
imaginary island.<sup>4</sup> As Stevenson later recounted in his essay,
"My First Book: ‘Treasure Island’," the map gradually took on a life of
its own, populated with evocative names like "Spye-Glass Hill" and
marked with the fateful red crosses indicating buried
treasure.<sup>4</sup> From this collaborative, domestic pastime, the
characters and plot of the novel began to emerge "visibly among
imaginary woods".<sup>5</sup>

The map was not merely an inspiration but the very heart of the novel's
conception. When the original drawing was lost by the initial
publishers, Stevenson painstakingly redrew it, adding "embellishments of
blowing whales and sailing ships," and insisted on its inclusion as a
frontispiece.<sup>4</sup> This act underscores the map's centrality as
more than a mere plot device; it was the imaginative engine of the
entire work, a tangible link between the reader and the fictional world
that enabled anticipation and even the imagining of "alternative or
additional narratives".<sup>4</sup> The map functions as a semiotic
bridge, transforming a private game into a public invitation to
adventure, embodying the fragile stance between referentiality, which
kindles the imagination, and the potential for disappointment that
drives the narrative forward.<sup>4</sup>

This intimate origin story is deeply interwoven with the broader
tapestry of Stevenson's life. Born in Edinburgh to a respectable family
of lighthouse engineers, he was a man defined by a series of rebellions
against the life prescribed for him.<sup>2</sup> Frail health made his
formal education irregular, and he rejected the family profession,
eventually compromising with his father to study law, a profession he
never practiced.<sup>2</sup> Instead, he embraced a bohemian lifestyle,
rebelling against the perceived hypocrisies of bourgeois respectability
and declaring himself an agnostic, much to his devout Presbyterian
father's disappointment.<sup>2</sup> His life was a search for climates
that would soothe his weak lungs and for adventures that would feed his
literary imagination.<sup>5</sup> The most significant of these was his
perilous journey to America in 1879. Having fallen in love with an
older, married American woman, Fanny Vandegrift Osbourne, he followed
her to California, traveling steerage across the Atlantic and in an
emigrant train across the plains.<sup>2</sup> The journey nearly killed
him; impoverished and starving, he faced death in Monterey and San
Francisco before finally marrying Fanny in 1880.<sup>2</sup> This
harrowing experience, which predated the writing of

*Treasure Island*, infused his work with an authentic understanding of
adventure, poverty, and the precarity of life, lending a gravitas to his
fiction that elevated it beyond mere escapism.<sup>1</sup>

### Victorian Adventure and the Specter of Empire

While born in a domestic setting, *Treasure Island* was published into a
culture ripe for its reception. The novel is set in the mid-18th
century, evoking the so-called "golden age" of piracy that flourished in
the Caribbean and American colonial waters after 1650.<sup>6</sup> For
many late-Victorian writers and readers, this earlier period represented
a lost time of unrestricted freedom, a romanticized antidote to the
rigid social and industrial structures of their own era.<sup>1</sup>
Stevenson drew heavily on the historical and literary accounts of this
period, most notably Charles Johnson's influential 1724 book,

*A General History of the Robberies and Murders of the Most Notorious
Pyrates*, which provided biographical sketches of figures like
Blackbeard and established much of the pirate lore, including the use of
the Jolly Roger flag.<sup>1</sup> He also acknowledged the influence of
contemporary writers like Edgar Allan Poe, whose story "The Gold-Bug"
shared the theme of a treasure map, and Washington Irving, from whose

*Tales of a Traveller* he borrowed the archetype for the character of
Billy Bones.<sup>1</sup>

The novel's publication coincided with significant transformations in
print culture and the literary market. Advances in illustration
technology and the widespread availability of popular fiction,
particularly the "penny press," created a voracious audience for
adventure stories.<sup>4</sup>

*Treasure Island* was first published serially from October 1881 to
January 1882 in the children's magazine *Young Folks*, under the title
*The Sea-Cook; or, Treasure Island*.<sup>7</sup> The initial
serialization, however, was not particularly well-received.<sup>5</sup>
Stevenson's wife, Fanny, reportedly disliked it and was against its
publication in book form.<sup>5</sup> This lukewarm reception suggests a
disconnect between the story's deeper psychological complexities and the
expectations of an audience accustomed to more straightforward juvenile
fiction. It was only upon its publication as a single volume by Cassell
& Company in 1883 that the novel was hailed as a masterpiece and became
a bestseller, with an initial print run of 2,000 copies.<sup>9</sup>

The novel is also a product of its intellectual climate, emerging from a
British Neo-Romanticism that championed a distinctly masculine
culture.<sup>4</sup> It helped define the "fin-de-siècle adventure
hero," a figure whose character was shaped by the psychological
landscape of an industrialized nation.<sup>4</sup> This hero was an
"industrialised gentleman-hero," embodying concepts of industry and
self-help that were seen as integral to the nation's
well-being.<sup>4</sup> Yet, while the novel can be read as a
celebration of these values, its reputation as a simple masterpiece of
"boyhood fiction" often obscures its more "adult" implications, which
delve into the complicated nature of human character and the ambiguous
depths of the human consciousness.<sup>4</sup>

## Part II: Critical Navigations of the Text

For over a century, *Treasure Island* has been celebrated as the
archetypal adventure story. However, its enduring power lies not in its
adherence to genre conventions but in its subtle and consistent
subversion of them. Beneath its surface of swashbuckling and treasure
hunting, the novel engages in a sophisticated exploration of moral
ambiguity, the corrupting nature of colonialism, and the complex
realities of the human body. Applying the lenses of modern literary
theory reveals a text that actively questions the moral, political, and
physical norms of its time, allowing it to be continuously reinterpreted
by successive generations of readers and critics.

### The Moral Compass: Coming of Age in a World of Ambiguity

At its core, *Treasure Island* is a *Bildungsroman*, a coming-of-age
story that charts the moral and psychological development of its young
protagonist, Jim Hawkins.<sup>11</sup> At the outset, Jim is a timid
boy, overshadowed by his parents at the Admiral Benbow Inn.<sup>13</sup>
By the novel's end, he has navigated mutiny, outwitted seasoned pirates,
and taken command of a ship, maturing into a resourceful and courageous
young man.<sup>12</sup> This transformation, however, is not achieved
through the guidance of conventional, upstanding role models. While Dr.
Livesey and Squire Trelawney represent the forces of order and
civilization, they are too staid and predictable to truly captivate
Jim's imagination.<sup>11</sup> Jim's father is a peripheral figure who
dies early in the narrative, and Jim makes no mention of these men at
the close of his tale, suggesting they were not central to his
development.<sup>13</sup>

The true agent of Jim's education is the novel's most complex and
compelling character: Long John Silver. Silver is the central enigma of
the text, a figure who defies easy categorization as either hero or
villain.<sup>12</sup> He is a mutineer and a murderer, yet he is also
charismatic, intelligent, and displays a genuine, if opportunistic,
affection for Jim. He becomes the boy's primary mentor, and Jim
describes him with an intensity and detail reserved for no other
character.<sup>13</sup> Silver's defining trait is his radical
self-interest; his only allegiance is to himself, and he shifts
alliances based purely on what is most expedient.<sup>11</sup> It is
this profound moral ambiguity that fascinates Jim and provides him with
a more potent, if perilous, education in human nature than the simple
morality of the "good" men could ever offer. Silver himself recognizes a
kindred spirit in Jim, remarking that the boy reminds him of his younger
self, a chilling hint at the man Jim could become.<sup>13</sup> By the
end, Jim has absorbed some of Silver's most effective qualities—his
courage, charisma, and independence—without succumbing to his amorality,
demonstrating a maturation that is far more nuanced than a simple
victory of good over evil.

This moral complexity extends to the novel's central theme: the quest
for treasure. The pursuit of Captain Flint's gold is the engine of the
plot, a desire that motivates every character.<sup>13</sup> Yet, the
novel systematically exposes the futility of this desire. For the
pirates, greed leads only to paranoia, betrayal, and death. Their
discovery that the treasure has already been moved—leaving only an empty
hole in the ground—serves as a powerful symbol for the moral emptiness
of their quest, as if they are digging their own graves.<sup>13</sup>
Even for the "good" party, the treasure brings little ultimate
satisfaction. Ben Gunn, who possessed the gold for months, is a half-mad
outcast living in a cave, a testament to the treasure's uselessness
without a society to give it value.<sup>13</sup> Jim, in his closing
narration, focuses not on the wealth he has gained but on the decorative
details of the foreign coins and the nightmares the experience has left
him with, concluding that no amount of money could tempt him on another
such adventure.<sup>13</sup> The story thus functions as a cautionary
tale about the corrupting nature of greed and the ultimate hollowness of
material desire when divorced from a moral framework.

### Cartographies of Power: A Post-Colonial Reading

Published at the zenith of the British Empire, *Treasure Island* appears
at first glance to be a classic imperial romance, a story of Englishmen
venturing to an exotic locale to extract its wealth.<sup>15</sup>
However, a post-colonial analysis reveals a text that actively subverts
the conventions of its genre, offering a subtle critique of the imperial
project itself.<sup>16</sup> Unlike contemporary adventure novels such
as H. Rider Haggard's

*King Solomon's Mines*, Stevenson's island is not a promised land to be
settled or a "barbarous" nation in need of a "civilizing
mission".<sup>16</sup> It is a decontextualized space, valued only for
the treasure it holds—a pure "value-extracting endeavour".<sup>15</sup>

Crucially, the central conflict is not between a racially superior
European colonizer and an indigenous "other." The island is largely
uninhabited, save for the marooned Ben Gunn. The struggle is an internal
one, a mutiny of Englishmen against Englishmen.<sup>16</sup> This
narrative choice re-maps the typical colonial story. The threat to order
comes not from an external, racialized enemy but from the "lawlessness
and criminality internal to the system of European cultural
identification".<sup>16</sup> The pirates, led by the duplicitous
Silver, represent the brutal reality of greed and violence that
underpins the entire colonial enterprise, a reality often masked by the
rhetoric of civilizing duty.<sup>17</sup> The supposedly respectable
gentlemen, Squire Trelawney and Dr. Livesey, are also complicit,
sacrificing their civic responsibilities to chase after plunder,
effectively reducing them to a different class of pirate.<sup>17</sup>
The novel thus exposes the moral hypocrisy at the heart of imperialism,
suggesting that the pursuit of wealth corrupts all who engage in it,
regardless of their social standing.

The treasure map itself functions as a potent symbol of imperial
knowledge and control.<sup>15</sup> In the colonial context, the act of
mapping was an act of power; by delineating and naming foreign
territories, European nations bestowed upon themselves the right to
possess and exploit them.<sup>17</sup> Flint's map, with its detailed
soundings and landmarks, similarly grants its possessor authority over
the island and its resources.<sup>15</sup> The fight over the map
anticipates the "Scramble for Africa" and other 19th-century conflicts
over colonial territories.<sup>17</sup> Yet, the novel also reveals the
"blood price" of this knowledge. The map is a record of violence—Flint
murdered six men to create it—and it leads to the deaths of seventeen
more men over the course of the novel.<sup>15</sup> This "cartographic
silence" regarding the human cost of treasure mirrors the way real-world
colonial maps depicted landscapes ripe for exploitation while erasing
the violence of their acquisition.<sup>15</sup> Jim's final reflection
on the "accursed island" and his recurring nightmares of the sea suggest
a deep-seated trauma, a recognition that the imperial adventure is not a
glorious game but a grim and bloody reality.<sup>16</sup>

### Articulating the Body: A Disability Studies Perspective

Long John Silver is one of the most iconic disabled characters in
literature, and a critical analysis through the lens of disability
studies reveals a portrayal of remarkable complexity and nuance, one
that challenges the prevalent stereotypes of the Victorian
era.<sup>18</sup> In 19th-century fiction, disability was often used as
a narrative shorthand for moral deficiency or, conversely, for saintly
suffering.<sup>19</sup> Disabled characters were frequently depicted as
either pathetic victims or deceptive villains, their bodies rendered as
spectacles to evoke pity or suspicion.<sup>21</sup> Silver, however,
resists these easy categorizations.

Stevenson based the character on his friend, the poet and editor William
Ernest Henley, who had lost a leg to tuberculosis.<sup>22</sup>
Stevenson wrote that he decided to create Silver by taking Henley and
stripping him of his "finer qualities," leaving only his "strength, his
courage, his quickness, and his magnificent geniality".<sup>22</sup>
This origin is significant, as it shows that Stevenson did not see these
dynamic traits as being incompatible with physical disability. In the
novel, Silver consistently defies the stereotype of the disabled person
as "dependent, childlike, passive, and miserable".<sup>18</sup> He is
supremely active, strong, and mobile, described at one point as moving
with the agility of a "trained gymnast".<sup>18</sup>

His choice of a crutch is also noteworthy. As scholar Alexandra Valint
argues, Victorian society often connected the loss of a limb to a loss
of masculinity, with artificial limbs seen as a way to restore that loss
and conceal the impairment.<sup>18</sup> Silver, however, uses a
crutch—his "timber leg"—which makes his stump and his disability
immediately visible. Despite this, he is never depicted as anything less
than a commanding, masculine, and even "sexually vigorous"
figure.<sup>18</sup> He is always the agent in control of his crutch; it
does not control him. It serves not only as a mobility aid, helping him
fuse with the rolling movements of the ship, but also as a "pirate
aid"—a tool and a deadly weapon, which he uses to kill a sailor who
refuses to join the mutiny.<sup>18</sup>

Ultimately, the novel rejects what David Mitchell and Sharon Snyder have
termed "narrative prosthesis," the common literary trope in which a
disabled character must be either cured or eradicated by the story's
end.<sup>18</sup> While Silver does struggle physically near the
conclusion, the narrative simultaneously highlights the tenuousness of
able-bodiedness, as other characters fall victim to illness, madness,
and injury.<sup>18</sup> In the end, Silver escapes, his disability
intact, his complex identity un-erased. He is neither punished for his
villainy nor "saved" from his impairment, a remarkably progressive
representation for its time that adds another layer to the novel's
subversive power.

## Part III: International Voyages and Receptions

The global success of *Treasure Island* is not a story of a single,
monolithic text being passively received by a worldwide audience.
Rather, it is a dynamic process of cultural translation, adaptation, and
reinterpretation. As the novel crossed borders, it was transformed, its
narrative and themes refracted through the unique political,
ideological, and cultural prisms of each new society. The journey of
*Treasure Island* reveals that a literary work does not possess a fixed,
universal meaning; instead, it functions as a cultural mirror,
reflecting the distinct preoccupations and needs of the nations that
embrace it. An examination of its reception in key European countries,
and particularly in Poland, illustrates this process of cultural
negotiation.

### An Anchor in Europe: Foundational Reception in France and Germany

In France, the arrival of *L'Île au trésor* was a significant literary
event, intervening in a heated domestic debate about the future of the
novel.<sup>23</sup> At the turn of the 20th century, French critics were
searching for an alternative to the perceived stagnation of literary
realism. Figures like the influential writer and critic Marcel Schwob
championed Stevenson's work as a model for a revitalized "roman
d'aventures" that could transcend the sterile opposition between realism
and romance.<sup>23</sup> This intellectual embrace elevated the novel
beyond mere popular fiction; it became a key text for writers and
theorists associated with

*La Nouvelle Revue Française*, including André Gide, who used it to help
formulate a new theory of the adventure novel.<sup>23</sup> The French
press reviewed Stevenson's publications with praise, cementing his
popularity and ensuring his place in the French literary
consciousness.<sup>24</sup> This critical engagement continues into the
21st century, with new translations, such as the one by Jean-Jacques
Greif, being celebrated for their success in capturing the lively,
"crude" language of the original pirates, suggesting an ongoing effort
to produce a more authentic French version of the text.<sup>25</sup>

In the German-speaking world, the novel's path to cultural canonization
took a different route, one paved by the medium of television. The 1966
television miniseries *Die Schatzinsel*, a lavish German-French
co-production, became a defining cultural moment for a
generation.<sup>28</sup> The series was immensely popular and has
achieved a legendary status, now considered a "mythos of German
television history".<sup>28</sup> Despite being over half a century old,
it continues to be broadcast almost annually, embedding the story deeply
into the nation's shared cultural memory.<sup>29</sup> This phenomenon
demonstrates that a work's cultural significance can be established and
sustained primarily through a powerful and beloved adaptation, which in
this case has become more influential than the literary text itself for
the general public.

### Ideological Crosscurrents: Adaptation in the Soviet Union

The reception of *Treasure Island* in the Soviet Union provides a stark
example of how a literary text can be co-opted and reshaped to serve a
dominant political ideology. The novel was available in Russian
translation from an early date, with Nikolai Chukovsky's version from
the 1930s becoming the canonical and most widely read text for
decades.<sup>30</sup> However, it was through the medium of film that
the story was most dramatically reinterpreted. A comparative analysis of
the three major Soviet film adaptations reveals a fascinating trajectory
of ideological manipulation, artistic fidelity, and eventual censorship.

**Table 1: A Comparative Overview of Major Soviet Film Adaptations**

| Year | Director | Key Character Changes | Plot/Thematic Alterations | Dominant Ideological Framing |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| **1937** | Vladimir Vajnshtok | \- Jim Hawkins replaced by a girl, Jenny, who is in love with Dr. Livesey. - Long John Silver has two legs (one is shrunken). - Ben Gunn dies. | \- The treasure is sought not for personal greed but to buy weapons for Irish freedom fighters. | \- Explicitly anti-capitalist and pro-national liberation. Squire Trelawney is recast as a treacherous capitalist villain. |
| **1971** | Evgeny Fridman | \- Characters are largely faithful to the novel. | \- Described as an "almost verbatim" adaptation with only minor omissions (e.g., the absence of Black Dog). | \- Largely apolitical and faithful to the spirit of the adventure novel. Focuses on action and character. |
| **1982** | Vladimir Vorobyov | \- Jim Hawkins is played by a very young actor (Fedya Stukov), altering the coming-of-age dynamic. | \- Originally a 4-part miniseries, it was heavily censored and cut down, removing most of the violence and darker themes. | \- The widely circulated censored version presents the story as a lighthearted, musical children's film, obscuring the original's moral ambiguity and black comedy. |

The 1937 film, directed by Vladimir Vajnshtok, is the most overtly
political adaptation. In line with Stalinist-era ideology, the narrative
was completely reframed as a story of class struggle.<sup>30</sup> The
quest for treasure becomes a noble mission to fund an anti-imperialist
rebellion, and the aristocratic Squire Trelawney is transformed into a
villainous capitalist traitor.<sup>30</sup> In contrast, the 1971 film
by Evgeny Fridman is a remarkably faithful adaptation, lauded for its
concise and accurate retelling of the novel's plot.<sup>30</sup> The
1982 television miniseries, directed by Vladimir Vorobyov, represents a
third path. Originally a dark and complex production with notes of black
comedy, it was twice censored for its scenes of violence, gambling, and
frightening imagery, with the final, widely seen version being a much
tamer, musical-inflected children's film.<sup>30</sup> Beyond these
live-action films, the 1988 animated feature

*Ostrov Sokrovishch* (*Treasure Island*) stands out. Produced by the
Ukrainian studio Kievnauchfilm, this version is a beloved classic known
for its unique comedic style, stylized animation, and memorable
live-action musical interludes about the dangers of smoking and
drinking.<sup>32</sup> In recent years, it has gained a significant
international cult following through the internet, demonstrating a
cross-cultural appeal that transcends its Soviet origins.<sup>33</sup>

### ***Wyspa Skarbów***: The Polish Legacy (Special Focus)

In Poland, *Treasure Island*—or *Wyspa Skarbów*—holds a cherished and
enduring place in the cultural landscape. Its legacy is not primarily
one of intense academic debate or ideological manipulation, but of a
foundational text for childhood reading and education. It has been
seamlessly integrated into the fabric of Polish literary culture,
serving as a gateway to adventure for generations of young readers.

#### From Manuscript to Mainstay: A History of Polish Translation

The novel made its debut in Poland relatively quickly, appearing just
ten years after its original English publication. This history of
translation has been crucial to its sustained popularity, with different
versions serving successive generations.

**Table 2: Key Polish Translations of *Treasure Island***

| Year | Polish Title | Translator | Publisher/Notes | Significance |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| **1893** | *Skarby na wyspie* | Unknown | N/A | First known Polish edition, establishing the novel's presence in Poland.<sup>34</sup> |
| **pre-WWII** | *Wyspa skarbów* | Józef Birkenmajer | N/A | The most popular and influential translation for many decades; became the canonical version for generations of Polish readers.<sup>34</sup> |
| **2014** | *Wyspa skarbów* | Andrzej Polkowski | Media Rodzina | A modern translation by the celebrated translator of *Harry Potter* and *The Chronicles of Narnia*, designed to appeal to contemporary young readers.<sup>34</sup> |

The first Polish version, titled *Skarby na wyspie* ("Treasures on the
Island"), was published in 1893.<sup>34</sup> However, it was the
pre-World War II translation by Józef Birkenmajer that became the
definitive text for many Poles, shaping their experience of the story
for much of the 20th century.<sup>34</sup> Its enduring influence is
evidenced by its use in a 1995 audiobook production read by actor Marek
Obertyn.<sup>36</sup> In the 21st century, new translations continue to
appear, most notably one by Andrzej Polkowski, a translator renowned for
his work on major fantasy series.<sup>37</sup> This ongoing work of
re-translation ensures that the novel's language remains fresh and
accessible to new audiences. Furthermore, the proliferation of bilingual
English-Polish editions highlights the novel's dual function in Poland:
not only as a work of literature but also as a popular and effective
tool for learning the English language.<sup>38</sup>

#### The Education of a Nation: 'Wyspa Skarbów' in Polish Schools and Homes

In Poland, *Wyspa Skarbów* is deeply embedded in the culture of
childhood reading. It is often one of the first "grown-up" books that
children receive from their parents, serving as a bridge from simpler
tales to more complex narrative fiction, even if it is sometimes
presented in abridged editions.<sup>41</sup> This informal status as a
childhood classic is reinforced by its formal inclusion in the Polish
national education system.

The novel is part of the official reading list (*podstawa programowa*)
for the Polish language curriculum in primary school.<sup>42</sup>
Specifically, fragments of

*Wyspa skarbów* are assigned for study in the 6th grade. In this
context, the text is used to teach fundamental literary concepts, such
as the elements of the fictional world, character types, narrative
structure, and the specific generic conventions of the adventure
novel.<sup>43</sup> Its primary educational role appears to be in middle
school, where it is used to foster literary appreciation and a love for
reading through an engaging and accessible story. While it is a staple
of early literary education, there is no evidence to suggest that the
full text is a required reading for the final secondary school
examination, the Matura.<sup>44</sup>

#### The Cultural Echo: Adaptations and Reception in Poland

The cultural footprint of *Wyspa Skarbów* in Poland extends beyond the
printed page. Animated adaptations of the story have been dubbed into
Polish, indicating a significant audience and market for the tale in
various media. The 1995 Golden Films animated movie, for instance, had
at least two separate Polish dubs released in 1997, one by Cass Film for
VHS and another broadcast on the public channel TVP2, featuring
well-known Polish voice actors like Andrzej Ferenc and Jacek
Wolszczak.<sup>45</sup>

The critical reception of the novel in Poland appears to be driven by
popular enthusiasm rather than academic scrutiny. Extensive searches of
major Polish academic literary databases and the archives of prominent
literary journals such as *Pamiętnik Literacki* and *Twórczość* did not
yield any specific scholarly articles on Stevenson or *Wyspa
Skarbów*.<sup>46</sup> This suggests that, unlike in France, the novel
has not been a subject of intense critical debate within Polish
academia. Instead, its reception is best measured by its consistent
popularity with the reading public. Online bookstores and reader
communities feature overwhelmingly positive reviews, praising the novel
as a timeless classic that is "fascinating and ignites the
imagination".<sup>48</sup> This popular appeal has also led to the
creation of ancillary cultural products, including Polish-language board
games based on the novel, which have been positively reviewed within the
gaming community for their quality and engaging mechanics.<sup>49</sup>
The novel's legacy in Poland is thus one of widespread affection and
integration into the formative experiences of youth, a beloved classic
passed down through generations.

## Part IV: The Enduring Legacy in the 21st Century

More than 140 years after its initial publication, *Treasure Island*
continues to exert a profound influence on global popular culture. Its
legacy, however, is not static; it is a dynamic and evolving phenomenon,
shaped less by direct engagement with Stevenson's original text and more
by a long and varied history of adaptation. Through film, television,
and digital media, the novel's core elements have been simplified,
exaggerated, deconstructed, and reimagined, ensuring their continued
relevance. The primary legacy of *Treasure Island* is, therefore, a
legacy of adaptation, a process through which its narrative framework
has become a foundational element of our modern understanding of
adventure.

### Codifying the Pirate Archetype

When one pictures a pirate today, a specific and near-universal image
comes to mind: a seaman with a peg leg, a parrot on his shoulder, who
speaks with a thick West Country English accent and punctuates his
speech with phrases like "Arrr!" and "Shiver me timbers!".<sup>31</sup>
This powerful archetype, perpetuated in countless films, books, and
costumes, is overwhelmingly the product not of historical reality, nor
even of Stevenson's novel itself, but of a single, definitive film
adaptation: the 1950 Walt Disney production of

*Treasure Island*.<sup>31</sup>

While Stevenson's novel introduced many of the now-familiar tropes—the
treasure map marked with an "X," the one-legged seaman, and the parrot
crying "pieces of eight"—it was the performance of British actor Robert
Newton as Long John Silver that codified them into an indelible cultural
stereotype.<sup>7</sup> Newton, a native of England's West Country,
exaggerated his regional accent to create a distinctive "pirate talk"
that had no basis in history but was immensely effective on
screen.<sup>1</sup> His portrayal was so iconic and memorable that he
reprised the role in a sequel and played the historical pirate
Blackbeard in a similar style, further cementing this invented persona
in the public consciousness.<sup>31</sup> Subsequent pirate-themed
media, from the family adventure film

*The Goonies* (1985) to the blockbuster *Pirates of the Caribbean*
franchise, have all drawn heavily on the visual and linguistic grammar
established by Newton's performance.<sup>1</sup> This demonstrates the
immense power of a single influential adaptation to overwrite its source
material in the popular imagination, creating a cultural shorthand that
is more potent and widespread than the more nuanced original.

### Contemporary Reimaginings and Digital Afterlives

The narrative framework of *Treasure Island* has proven to be remarkably
plastic, providing a robust foundation for creators to build upon,
deconstruct, and reinvent. In the 21st century, the story continues to
be retold in diverse and innovative ways across multiple media,
showcasing its enduring adaptability.

One of the most ambitious reimaginings is Disney's 2002 animated
feature, *Treasure Planet*.<sup>52</sup> This film transposes the entire
story into a science-fiction setting, with solar-powered sailing ships
traversing the ether and Long John Silver reimagined as a
cyborg.<sup>52</sup> Despite the futuristic setting, the film remains
remarkably faithful to the core emotional and thematic beats of the
original novel, particularly the complex father-son relationship between
Jim Hawkins and Silver, demonstrating the timelessness of Stevenson's
characters and themes.<sup>53</sup> At the other end of the spectrum is
the television series

*Black Sails* (2014–2017), which serves as a gritty, adult-oriented
prequel to the novel.<sup>54</sup> This series delves into the dark and
violent backstory of Captain Flint and a younger, more ruthless John
Silver, effectively deconstructing the romanticism of the pirate myth
and returning to the moral ambiguity that was central to Stevenson's
original text. The existence of these two adaptations—one a
family-friendly sci-fi epic, the other a dark historical
drama—highlights the incredible versatility of the source material.

This process of adaptation also continues in print. Numerous graphic
novel versions of *Treasure Island* have been published, using the
visual language of comics to make the story accessible to new
generations and different types of readers.<sup>55</sup> The story has
also found a new life in the digital realm through the activities of fan
communities. While not a massive fandom, archives like Archive of Our
Own (AO3) host a small but dedicated collection of fan-written stories
based on the novel.<sup>58</sup> In these works, fans explore the
characters' relationships and motivations in ways the original text does
not, often through queer or alternative interpretations. This represents
the most democratic form of adaptation, a grassroots effort by
individual readers to engage with, reinterpret, and rewrite the text to
reflect their own perspectives and interests, ensuring that the voyage
of the

*Hispaniola* continues in the boundless ocean of the digital age.

## Conclusion: From Devon to the World

The journey of Robert Louis Stevenson's *Treasure Island* from a story
conceived for a single boy in a Scottish parlor to a globally resonant
cultural touchstone is a testament to its profound narrative power and
thematic depth. Its genesis, a fusion of domestic intimacy and the
expansionist fantasies of the Victorian age, endowed it with a unique
dual nature. It operates simultaneously as a thrilling, straightforward
adventure tale and as a complex, subversive text that interrogates the
very foundations of morality, empire, and identity.

This inherent richness has allowed the novel to be read through a
variety of critical lenses, revealing layers of meaning that challenge
its simple classification as a "boy's book." A post-colonial reading
uncovers a critique of the imperial project's inherent violence and
moral hypocrisy, while a disability studies perspective highlights a
remarkably progressive and nuanced portrayal of physical difference in
the character of Long John Silver. These critical navigations
demonstrate that the novel's endurance is owed not to its simplicity,
but to its complexity.

This complexity has also been the key to its successful voyage across
international borders. The novel has proven to be a remarkably adaptable
cultural artifact, capable of being reinterpreted to fit the distinct
ideological and cultural needs of diverse nations. In France, it served
as a crucial exhibit in a high-minded literary debate; in the Soviet
Union, it became a vessel for state propaganda and class struggle; in
Germany, its identity merged with that of a beloved television event,
becoming a symbol of shared nostalgia. In Poland, its role has been
primarily formative and pedagogical. As *Wyspa Skarbów*, it has been a
cornerstone of childhood reading for over a century, formally integrated
into the national school curriculum as a tool for fostering literary
appreciation. Its legacy in Poland is one of widespread affection, a
classic adventure passed down through generations, cherished more for
the imaginative spark it ignites in young readers than for any specific
ideological or critical purpose.

Ultimately, the enduring power of *Treasure Island* lies not in a
single, fixed meaning, but in its boundless capacity for
reinterpretation. Its most visible legacy in popular culture—the
archetypal pirate—is a product of adaptation, a testament to how the
story's framework can be simplified and amplified to create new cultural
myths. From gritty television prequels to science-fiction retellings and
digital fan creations, the novel continues to serve as a vessel for our
ever-changing stories of adventure, morality, and the perilous search
for treasure, both literal and metaphorical. The voyage that began with
a hand-drawn map continues, with no end in sight.

#### Cytowane prace

1.  Treasure Island Historical Context \| Book Analysis, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://bookanalysis.com/robert-louis-stevenson/treasure-island/historical-context/</u>](https://bookanalysis.com/robert-louis-stevenson/treasure-island/historical-context/)

2.  Robert Louis Stevenson \| Biography, Famous Works, Books, Death ...,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/biography/Robert-Louis-Stevenson</u>](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Robert-Louis-Stevenson)

3.  The Life - Robert Louis Stevenson Museum, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://stevensonmuseum.org/robert-louis-stevenson/the-life/</u>](https://stevensonmuseum.org/robert-louis-stevenson/the-life/)

4.  My First Book—Treasure Island - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/50371707_My_First_Book-Treasure_Island</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/50371707_My_First_Book-Treasure_Island)

5.  Robert Louis Stevenson \| The Poetry Foundation, otwierano: lipca
    27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/robert-louis-stevenson</u>](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/robert-louis-stevenson)

6.  Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson \| EBSCO Research
    Starters, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/treasure-island-robert-louis-stevenson</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/treasure-island-robert-louis-stevenson)

7.  Treasure Island \| Characters, Summary, & Facts - Britannica,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/topic/Treasure-Island</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Treasure-Island)

8.  Treasure Island \| Robert Louis Stevenson \| First Edition -
    Burnside Rare Books, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.burnsiderarebooks.com/pages/books/140946458/robert-louis-stevenson/treasure-island</u>](https://www.burnsiderarebooks.com/pages/books/140946458/robert-louis-stevenson/treasure-island)

9.  Treasure Island - The First Edition Rare Books, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://thefirstedition.com/product/treasure-island-2/</u>](https://thefirstedition.com/product/treasure-island-2/)

10. Treasure Island Robert Louis Stevenson First Edition - Raptis Rare
    Books, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.raptisrarebooks.com/product/treasure-island-first-edition-robert-louis-stevenson/</u>](https://www.raptisrarebooks.com/product/treasure-island-first-edition-robert-louis-stevenson/)

11. The Real Treasure in Robert Louis Stevenson's Treasure Island -
    Hillsdale College, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.hillsdale.edu/hillsdale-blog/k12-classical-education/the-real-treasure-in-robert-louis-stevensons-treasure-island/</u>](https://www.hillsdale.edu/hillsdale-blog/k12-classical-education/the-real-treasure-in-robert-louis-stevensons-treasure-island/)

12. Summary of “Treasure Island” by Robert Louis Stevenson \| by
    Kortland Book Club \| Medium, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://kortland91.medium.com/summary-of-treasure-island-by-robert-louis-stevenson-e9feaa1162fe</u>](https://kortland91.medium.com/summary-of-treasure-island-by-robert-louis-stevenson-e9feaa1162fe)

13. Treasure Island: Themes \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/treasure/themes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/treasure/themes/)

14. Themes And Symbols In Robert Louis Stevenson's Treasure Island \|
    Cram, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cram.com/essay/Themes-And-Symbols-In-Robert-Louis-Stevensons/FJ5BZXGHPR</u>](https://www.cram.com/essay/Themes-And-Symbols-In-Robert-Louis-Stevensons/FJ5BZXGHPR)

15. Boys will be boys: Robert Louis Stevenson's Treasure Island and the
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.edinburghmuseums.org.uk/sites/default/files/attachments/Boys%20will%20be%20boys%20Robert%20Louis%20Stevenson%E2%80%99s%20Treasure%20Island%20and%20the%20never%20ending%20adventure%20of%20colonialism.pdf</u>](https://www.edinburghmuseums.org.uk/sites/default/files/attachments/Boys%20will%20be%20boys%20Robert%20Louis%20Stevenson%E2%80%99s%20Treasure%20Island%20and%20the%20never%20ending%20adventure%20of%20colonialism.pdf)

16. That Accursed Island. Treasure Island and Imperial Disappointments,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://epub.uni-regensburg.de/53702/1/75-Artikeltext-228-1-10-20220706%281%29.pdf</u>](https://epub.uni-regensburg.de/53702/1/75-Artikeltext-228-1-10-20220706%281%29.pdf)

17. Crisis in Colonialism - FAU, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://fau.digital.flvc.org/islandora/object/fau%3A10186/datastream/OBJ/view/Crisis_in_colonialism\_\_The_South_Seas_writing_of_Robert_Louis_Stevenson.pdf</u>](https://fau.digital.flvc.org/islandora/object/fau%3A10186/datastream/OBJ/view/Crisis_in_colonialism__The_South_Seas_writing_of_Robert_Louis_Stevenson.pdf)

18. “My Timber Leg”—Long John Silver's Crutch in Robert Louis ...,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.childlitassn.org/assets/PresenterAbstracts18/V/Alexandra%20Valint.pdf</u>](https://www.childlitassn.org/assets/PresenterAbstracts18/V/Alexandra%20Valint.pdf)

19. Review of Articulating Bodies: The Narrative Form of Disability and
    Illness in Victorian Fiction by Kylee-Anne Hingston, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://dsq-sds.org/index.php/dsq/article/view/7906/5879</u>](https://dsq-sds.org/index.php/dsq/article/view/7906/5879)

20. Saints, sufferers, scroungers and symbols: exploring Victorian
    representations of disability - Trinity College Cambridge,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.trin.cam.ac.uk/news/saints-sufferers-scroungers-and-symbols-exploring-victorian-representations-of-disability/</u>](https://www.trin.cam.ac.uk/news/saints-sufferers-scroungers-and-symbols-exploring-victorian-representations-of-disability/)

21. Deborah M. Fratz's Review of Martha Stoddard Holmes's Fictions of
    Affliction: Physical Disability in Victorian Culture • Issue 3.3 -
    Nineteenth-Century Gender Studies, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.ncgsjournal.com/issue33/fratz.html</u>](http://www.ncgsjournal.com/issue33/fratz.html)

22. The Conflict of Charity, Disability, and the Moral Exchange in
    Treasure Island - BYU ScholarsArchive, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1029&context=criterion</u>](https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1029&context=criterion)

23. R.L. Stevenson, Joseph Conrad and the adventure novel : reception
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://theses.fr/2015USPCA160</u>](https://theses.fr/2015USPCA160)

24. R. L. Stevenson, maître de l'aventure et du mystère, jugé par les
    critiques français, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.retronews.fr/arts/echo-de-presse/2019/10/22/robert-louis-stevenson</u>](https://www.retronews.fr/arts/echo-de-presse/2019/10/22/robert-louis-stevenson)

25. L'île au trésor (Nouvelle traduction) - Robert Louis Stevenson,
    Jean-Jacques Greif - broché, Livre tous les livres à la Fnac -
    Fnac.ch, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.fr.fnac.ch/a12101073/L-ile-au-tresor-L-ile-au-tresor-Nouvelle-traduction-Robert-Louis-Stevenson</u>](https://www.fr.fnac.ch/a12101073/L-ile-au-tresor-L-ile-au-tresor-Nouvelle-traduction-Robert-Louis-Stevenson)

26. L'île au trésor (Nouvelle traduction) - LITTERATURE ANGLOPHONE - 47
    Degres Nord, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://47degresnord.com/l-ile-au-tresor-nouvelle-traduction.html</u>](https://47degresnord.com/l-ile-au-tresor-nouvelle-traduction.html)

27. L'île au trésor (nouvelle traduction) - Robert Louis Stevenson -
    Librairie Eyrolles, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.eyrolles.com/Litterature/Livre/l-ile-au-tresor-nouvelle-traduction--9782367190693/</u>](https://www.eyrolles.com/Litterature/Livre/l-ile-au-tresor-nouvelle-traduction--9782367190693/)

28. Treasure Island (1966 miniseries) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Island\_(1966_miniseries)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Island_(1966_miniseries))

29. en.wikipedia.org, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Island\_(1966_miniseries)#:~:text=Island%20in%201986.-,Reception,little%2Dknown%20in%20other%20countries.</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Island_(1966_miniseries)#:~:text=Island%20in%201986.-,Reception,little%2Dknown%20in%20other%20countries.)

30. 3 Soviet film adaptations of Treasure Island: how do these films
    differ ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/russian/comments/17svzti/3_soviet_film_adaptations_of_treasure_island_how/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/russian/comments/17svzti/3_soviet_film_adaptations_of_treasure_island_how/)

31. The Eternal Legacy of Treasure Island \| Britannica, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/story/the-eternal-legacy-of-treasure-island</u>](https://www.britannica.com/story/the-eternal-legacy-of-treasure-island)

32. Treasure Island (1988 film) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Island\_(1988_film)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Island_(1988_film))

33. Treasure Island (1988) : r/russian - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/russian/comments/1863ihq/treasure_island_1988/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/russian/comments/1863ihq/treasure_island_1988/)

34. „Wyspa Skarbów” – Robert Louis Stevenson \| Czytam, bo chcę i już,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://dofi.com.pl/wyspa-skarbow-robert-louis-stevenson/</u>](https://dofi.com.pl/wyspa-skarbow-robert-louis-stevenson/)

35. Robert Louis Stevenson – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Louis_Stevenson</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Louis_Stevenson)

36. Wyspa skarbów \#01 \| Robert Louis Stevenson \| Audiobook po
    polsku - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i\_\_y8jCT4lw</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i__y8jCT4lw)

37. Wyspa skarbów - Robert Louis Stevenson \| Książka w Lubimyczytac
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/214715/wyspa-skarbow</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/214715/wyspa-skarbow)

38. Treasure Island (Webster's Polish Thesaurus Edition) - ICON Group
    International, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://insead.icongrouponline.com/en/Detail/classic/0000055297/Treasure%20Island%20(Webster's%20Polish%20Thesaurus%20Edition)</u>](https://insead.icongrouponline.com/en/Detail/classic/0000055297/Treasure%20Island%20(Webster's%20Polish%20Thesaurus%20Edition))

39. Wyspa skarbów. Wydanie dwujęzyczne angielsko-polskie - Robert Louis
    Stevenson - ebook \[epub, mobi\] \| Publio.pl, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://publio.pl/wyspa-skarbow-wydanie-dwujezyczne-angielsko-polskie-robert-louis-stevenson,p581872.html</u>](https://publio.pl/wyspa-skarbow-wydanie-dwujezyczne-angielsko-polskie-robert-louis-stevenson,p581872.html)

40. Treasure Island Wyspa Skarbów W Wersji Angielskiej I Polskiej Seria
    Czytamy W Oryginale - Ceny i opinie - Ceneo, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.ceneo.pl/102171050</u>](https://www.ceneo.pl/102171050)

41. On Henryk Sienkiewicz's historical trilogy \| The Center for
    Fiction, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://centerforfiction.org/book-recs/on-henryk-sienkiewiczs-historical-trilogy/</u>](https://centerforfiction.org/book-recs/on-henryk-sienkiewiczs-historical-trilogy/)

42. JĘZYK POLSKI, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://sp2dg.edupage.org/files/Jezyk_polski_program_klasy_5-6.pdf</u>](https://sp2dg.edupage.org/files/Jezyk_polski_program_klasy_5-6.pdf)

43. PROGRAM NAUCZANIA JĘZYKA POLSKIEGO W KLASACH 4–8 SZKOŁY PODSTAWOWEJ
    Słowa z uśmiechem + Myśli i słowa, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://cloud-a.edupage.org/cloud/Jpol_SP_Program_nauczania_4_8_Slowa_z_us_i_Mysli-slowa.pdf?z%3A%2B0fPA18ME17oKUUXW4ZIJPeh8q8Q4ncrHsJ15mtWjFqh7OrvY7hmpqCPLoHZ1Kg%2F</u>](https://cloud-a.edupage.org/cloud/Jpol_SP_Program_nauczania_4_8_Slowa_z_us_i_Mysli-slowa.pdf?z:%2B0fPA18ME17oKUUXW4ZIJPeh8q8Q4ncrHsJ15mtWjFqh7OrvY7hmpqCPLoHZ1Kg/)

44. otwierano: stycznia 1, 1970,
    [<u>https://cke.gov.pl/</u>](https://cke.gov.pl/)

45. Wyspa skarbów (Golden Films) – Dubbingpedia, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://dubbingpedia.pl/wiki/Wyspa_skarb%C3%B3w\_(Golden_Films)</u>](https://dubbingpedia.pl/wiki/Wyspa_skarb%C3%B3w_(Golden_Films))

46. Pamiętnik Literacki Kwartalnik naukowy, w którym publikowane są ...,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://pamietnik-literacki.pl/</u>](https://pamietnik-literacki.pl/)

47. Miesięcznik Twórczość, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tworczosc.com.pl/</u>](https://www.tworczosc.com.pl/)

48. Wyspa skarbów Robert Louis Stevenson książka \| TaniaKsiazka.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/wyspa-skarbow-robert-louis-stevenson</u>](https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/wyspa-skarbow-robert-louis-stevenson)

49. Recenzja gry planszowej Wyspa Skarbów \| MŁODY GIERCOWNIK,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://mlodygiercownik.pl/2018/04/24/recenzja-gry-planszowej-wyspa-skarbow/</u>](https://mlodygiercownik.pl/2018/04/24/recenzja-gry-planszowej-wyspa-skarbow/)

50. Wyspa Skarbów: Złoto Johna Silvera. Cyrklem i sprytem (recenzja) -
    Polter.pl, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://polter.pl/planszowki/Wyspa-Skarbow-Zloto-Johna-Silvera-c31187</u>](https://polter.pl/planszowki/Wyspa-Skarbow-Zloto-Johna-Silvera-c31187)

51. Treasure Island (1950 film) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Island\_(1950_film)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Island_(1950_film))

52. Treasure Planet - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Planet</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treasure_Planet)

53. How Treasure Planet Breathes New Life Into Treasure Island -
    Bookstr, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://bookstr.com/article/how-treasure-planet-breathes-new-life-into-treasure-island/</u>](https://bookstr.com/article/how-treasure-planet-breathes-new-life-into-treasure-island/)

54. Treasure Island from page to screen to television, otwierano: lipca
    27, 2025,
    [<u>https://silverscreenmodes.com/treasure-island-from-page-to-screen-to-tv/</u>](https://silverscreenmodes.com/treasure-island-from-page-to-screen-to-tv/)

55. Treasure Island Graphic Novel \| Robert Louis Stevenson \|
    Saddleback Educational Publishing \| Hi-Lo Booksª, otwierano: lipca
    27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sdlback.com/treasure-island/saddleback-educational-publishing-hi-lo-books</u>](https://www.sdlback.com/treasure-island/saddleback-educational-publishing-hi-lo-books)

56. Treasure Island: Campfire Graphic Novel\|Paperback - Barnes & Noble,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/treasure-island-robert-louis-stevenson/1111318442</u>](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/treasure-island-robert-louis-stevenson/1111318442)

57. Treasure Island Robert Louis Stevenson 1985 Classics and Comics
    Vintage YA Book Graphic Novel Educational Comic Literature Kids
    Reading - Etsy, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.etsy.com/listing/1671445326/treasure-island-robert-louis-stevenson</u>](https://www.etsy.com/listing/1671445326/treasure-island-robert-louis-stevenson)

58. Jim Hawkins (Treasure Island) - Works \| Archive of Our Own,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://archiveofourown.org/tags/Jim%20Hawkins/works</u>](https://archiveofourown.org/tags/Jim%20Hawkins/works)

59. Treasure Island - Robert Louis Stevenson - Works \| Archive of Our
    Own, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://archiveofourown.org/tags/Treasure%20Island%20-%20Robert%20Louis%20Stevenson/works</u>](https://archiveofourown.org/tags/Treasure%20Island%20-%20Robert%20Louis%20Stevenson/works)
