# An International Portrait: Deconstructing Harper Lee's To Kill a Mockingbird

## Why Should I Care? An Introduction for the 21st-Century Reader

Some books are assigned in school. A few, a very rare few, become part
of the global conversation for generations.<sup>1</sup> Harper Lee’s

*To Kill a Mockingbird*, first published in English in 1960, is one of
those rare few. It is more than just a story about a small town in the
American South during the Great Depression; it is a cultural artifact
that has been held up as a mirror to societies around the world. For
over sixty years, its pages have fueled intense debates about justice,
prejudice, innocence, and courage—not just in the United States, but in
classrooms in Poland, theaters in China, and homes in Japan.

This report moves beyond the typical American-focused analysis to
explore the novel's incredible international journey. It investigates
how a story so deeply rooted in the specific soil of 1930s Alabama could
grow to have such universal meaning. We will uncover the surprising
story of its creation, dissect the historical events that gave it shape,
and trace its path across continents and languages. Most importantly,
this report examines why this book still matters to you, a young reader
in the 21st century. It is a text that continues to be banned and
celebrated for the very same reasons: it forces us to confront
uncomfortable truths about our societies and ourselves, challenging us
to decide where we stand when faced with injustice.<sup>2</sup>

### Part I: Genesis and Text

## Chapter 1: The Making of a Masterpiece

### The Unlikely Author and Her Manuscript

The story of *To Kill a Mockingbird* begins with its author, Nelle
Harper Lee, born on April 28, 1926, in the small town of Monroeville,
Alabama. This town, with its slow pace, deep-seated traditions, and
simmering tensions, would become the undeniable blueprint for the
fictional setting of Maycomb.<sup>1</sup> Lee was the youngest of four
children, a self-described tomboy who felt alienated from her peers and
found refuge in reading and writing.

Her father, Amasa Coleman Lee, was a lawyer, newspaper editor, and state
senator whose character and career profoundly shaped the novel's moral
center, Atticus Finch. A pivotal and tragic event in her father's life
provides a crucial backstory to Atticus's motivations. In 1919, Amasa
Lee defended two Black men accused of murder. After they were convicted,
hanged, and their bodies mutilated, he never took another criminal case
again. This personal history of grappling with a flawed and brutal
justice system echoes throughout the moral fabric of the novel.

Lee's childhood was also defined by her close friendship with Truman
Persons, who would later become the celebrated author Truman Capote.
Capote, who spent his summers living next door to Lee, was the direct
inspiration for the character of Charles Baker "Dill" Harris, with his
vivid imagination and gift for storytelling.<sup>1</sup> Lee and Capote,
feeling like "apart people" in their small town, bonded over their love
of stories, creating and acting out tales on an old typewriter Lee's
father gave them. This friendship continued into their adult lives; in
1959, Lee traveled to Kansas to assist Capote with his extensive
research for his groundbreaking non-fiction novel,

*In Cold Blood*.

### Mind-Blown Moment: The Novel Was a Rewrite, Not a Revelation

One of the most persistent myths in modern literature is that of the
reclusive genius who produces a single, perfect novel and then vanishes.
While Harper Lee did become famously private, the creation of *To Kill a
Mockingbird* was far from a solitary act of sudden inspiration. The book
we know today was the product of a grueling, multi-year collaboration
that began with a very different manuscript.

In 1957, after moving to New York City to pursue a writing career, Lee
submitted a manuscript titled *Go Set a Watchman* to the publisher J.B.
Lippincott & Co..<sup>4</sup> The manuscript was received by an editor
named Therese von Hohoff Torrey, known professionally as Tay Hohoff.
While Hohoff saw "the spark of the true writer" in every line, she also
concluded that the manuscript was "more a series of anecdotes than a
fully conceived novel" and was not ready for publication.

What followed was not a simple edit, but a profound transformation. For
two and a half years, Hohoff guided Lee through an intensive rewriting
process.<sup>4</sup> She advised Lee to shift the focus away from the
adult Scout of

*Watchman* and to expand upon the flashback sequences set during her
childhood. This critical advice led Lee to rewrite the entire story from
a child's point of view, which became the novel's defining feature. At
one point in this arduous process, a frustrated Lee reportedly threw her
manuscript out of a window into the snow, only to be told by her editor
to retrieve it and continue working. The title itself evolved, changing
from *Go Set a Watchman* to *Atticus*, before Lee finally settled on *To
Kill a Mockingbird* to signify that the story's scope extended far
beyond a single character portrait. This history dismantles the
romanticized notion of the lone artist. The creation of this literary
masterpiece was a partnership, a testament to the crucial, though often
invisible, role of an editor in shaping a work of genius.

### From History to Fiction: The Trials that Shaped the Trial

The moral heart of *To Kill a Mockingbird* is the trial of Tom Robinson,
a Black man falsely accused of raping a white woman. This fictional
trial was not born in a vacuum; it was forged in the crucible of
real-life legal tragedies that exposed the deep-seated racial injustices
of the American South. The novel's power derives from its fusion of a
nationally recognized scandal with a deeply personal, local trauma.

The most significant historical parallel is the infamous **Scottsboro
Boys Case**.<sup>3</sup> This series of trials, which lasted from 1931
to 1937, began when nine Black teenagers were pulled from a freight
train in Alabama and accused of raping two white women. Despite flimsy
and later recanted testimony, the all-white juries delivered swift
convictions and death sentences for eight of the nine
defendants.<sup>5</sup> The case became an international cause célèbre,
drawing attention to the systemic racism of the Southern legal system
and eventually leading to landmark U.S. Supreme Court rulings, including

*Powell v. Alabama* (1932), which established the right to competent
legal counsel.<sup>6</sup> The Scottsboro case provided the novel with
its symbolic weight, connecting the fictional events in Maycomb to a
major, well-documented chapter in the history of American injustice.

However, a more intimate and perhaps more direct influence was the
**Walter Lett Trial** of 1933.<sup>6</sup> This case unfolded in Lee's
own hometown of Monroeville. Walter Lett, a Black man, was accused of
raping a white woman, Naomi Lowery, and the trial was reported on in the
newspaper edited by Lee's father. Like the Scottsboro defendants, Lett
was convicted by an all-white jury and sentenced to death. However, his
sentence was later commuted to life in prison by the Alabama governor,
who found the evidence insufficient.<sup>6</sup> Tragically, the strain
of the trial took a toll on Lett's mental health, and he died of
tuberculosis in a state mental institution a few years
later.<sup>6</sup>

The incorporation of these two historical events is a masterstroke of
literary creation. The Scottsboro case lends the story its epic,
symbolic dimension, making Tom Robinson's trial representative of a
nationwide struggle. The Walter Lett case, however, grounds the
narrative in the soil of Lee's own childhood. It transforms the novel
from a commentary on a distant tragedy into the processing of a hometown
trauma, witnessed through the eyes of a child. This synthesis of the
national and the personal, the symbolic and the painfully real, is a
primary source of the novel's enduring authenticity and emotional power.

## Chapter 2: The Language of Maycomb: Symbolism and Meaning Across Cultures

### Decoding the Mockingbird

The title of the novel is not a literal plot point but a powerful,
overarching symbol that encapsulates its central theme: the moral
imperative to protect the innocent. The meaning is made explicit when
Atticus tells his children, "Shoot all the blue jays you want, if you
can hit 'em, but remember it's a sin to kill a mockingbird". When Scout
asks their neighbor, Miss Maudie, for clarification, she explains that
mockingbirds are harmless creatures that only exist to create beauty.
"Mockingbirds don't do one thing but make music for us to enjoy," she
says. "They don't eat up people's gardens, don't nest in corn cribs,
they don't do one thing but sing their hearts out for us. That's why
it's a sin to kill a mockingbird".

Within the narrative, several characters embody this symbol of the
"mockingbird"—innocents who are injured or destroyed by their contact
with the evil of prejudice and hatred. The two most prominent examples
are:

- **Tom Robinson:** A kind, hardworking Black man who is falsely accused
  of a heinous crime. He is the ultimate mockingbird, destroyed by the
  town's systemic racism. After Tom is shot and killed while trying to
  escape prison, the town's newspaper editor, Mr. Underwood, writes an
  editorial comparing his death to "the senseless slaughter of
  songbirds".

- **Arthur "Boo" Radley:** A recluse who has been psychologically
  damaged by his cruel father, Boo is the subject of fearful childhood
  superstitions. Over the course of the novel, he reveals his inherent
  goodness through small gifts left for the children and, ultimately, by
  saving their lives. At the novel's conclusion, Scout understands that
  exposing Boo to the town's scrutiny for his heroic act would be like
  "shootin' a mockingbird".

Even the family's surname, **Finch**, which is a type of small songbird,
subtly reinforces this theme, suggesting their inherent vulnerability in
the harsh and often cruel world of Maycomb.

### Symbols in Translation: The Case of the Spanish Nightingale

The power of a symbol is deeply tied to its cultural context, and when a
novel travels across linguistic borders, these meanings can be
transformed in surprising ways. A fascinating example of this is found
in the Spanish translation of *To Kill a Mockingbird*.

The Spanish title is *Matar a un ruiseñor*, which translates to "To Kill
a Nightingale". The translator chose the word *ruiseñor* (nightingale)
instead of the more direct Spanish equivalent for mockingbird,
*cenzontle*. This choice is significant for several reasons. *Cenzontle*
is a word derived from the indigenous Aztec language, Nahuatl, meaning
"400 voices," a direct reference to the bird's ability to mimic the
songs of other birds. The nightingale, by contrast, is a bird celebrated
in European literature for its own beautiful, original song.

This substitution is not merely a linguistic choice but a cultural one.
The mockingbird's key symbolic trait in the novel is its ability to
imitate, which can be extended to represent the townspeople of Maycomb
who unthinkingly mimic each other's prejudices. By replacing this
complex American symbol with a familiar and celebrated European one, the
translator effectively "domesticated" the text. This act of translation
prioritized the comfort and understanding of the Spanish reader over the
specific cultural and ecological meaning of the source text. In doing
so, a crucial layer of the novel's central metaphor was lost,
illustrating how translation can sometimes flatten the unique cultural
landscape of a story to make it more palatable for a foreign audience.

### Beyond the Bird: Other Key Symbols

While the mockingbird is the novel's central symbol, Lee weaves a rich
tapestry of other symbolic elements throughout the narrative.

- **The Rabid Dog (Tim Johnson):** The scene in which Atticus is forced
  to shoot a rabid dog named Tim Johnson is a powerful allegory for the
  disease of racism spreading through Maycomb. The dog, once a familiar
  part of the neighborhood, has become irrational and dangerous, much
  like the town's prejudice. Atticus is the only one willing and able to
  confront this danger directly, an act that reveals a hidden strength
  to his children and sets him up as the town's lone moral defender
  against the madness of the mob. The sheriff Heck Tate's comment to
  Atticus after the shot, "You were a little to the right," can be read
  on multiple levels—as a literal observation, but also as a potential
  political or moral commentary on Atticus's position within the
  community.

- **The Radley House and Front Porches:** The Radley house, with its
  "rain-rotted shingles" and perpetual gloom, is a classic Southern
  Gothic symbol of mystery, fear, and isolation. It represents the
  unknown and the town's tendency to ostracize those who are different.
  In contrast, the front porches of Maycomb's other homes function as a
  crucial "liminal space"—a transitional zone between the private world
  of the family and the public sphere of the street. It is on these
  porches that personal beliefs are aired, public gossip is exchanged,
  and the community's moral tensions are played out in the open.

- **Flowers (Camellias and Geraniums):** Lee uses flowers to symbolize
  the complex nature of Southern womanhood and morality. Mrs. Dubose's
  white camellias represent the deep-rooted, seemingly pure, yet ugly
  prejudice of the Old South. When Jem destroys them in a fit of rage,
  he is attacking the town's racism, but he learns that such deeply
  rooted hatred cannot be so easily vanquished. In stark contrast are
  Mayella Ewell's red geraniums, which she carefully tends in
  "chipped-enamel slop jars" amidst the filth and squalor of the town
  dump. These flowers are a poignant symbol of Mayella's desperate and
  tragic desire for beauty, order, and a better life within an
  environment of profound deprivation and abuse.

### Part II: Context and Controversy

## Chapter 3: A Portrait of an Era: The American South and the World

### The Jim Crow South (1930s Setting)

The novel is set between 1933 and 1935 in the fictional town of Maycomb,
Alabama, squarely placing it in two defining periods of American
history: the Great Depression and the Jim Crow era. The Great
Depression, which began in 1929, brought widespread unemployment and
poverty that affected all residents of Maycomb, from the relatively
well-off Finches to the desperately poor Ewell and Cunningham families.

More pervasively, the setting is defined by the system of Jim Crow. This
was not merely segregation; it was a rigid social, political, and legal
code designed to enforce white supremacy and subjugate Black Americans.
Under Jim Crow, Black citizens were denied basic rights, faced constant
discrimination, and lived under the threat of violence. White
supremacist groups like the Ku Klux Klan held immense power, and mob
violence, particularly lynching, was used as a tool of terror and social
control, often becoming a public spectacle. This historical backdrop of
economic desperation and institutionalized racism is the world that
Scout, Jem, and Dill must navigate, and it is the system that Atticus
Finch chooses to challenge.

### The Civil Rights Era (1960s Publication)

While the story is set in the 1930s, its publication on July 11, 1960,
placed it directly into the heart of the American Civil Rights
Movement.<sup>3</sup> This timing was not an accident of history but a
key factor in the novel's explosive impact. As activists across the
South were challenging segregation through sit-ins, marches, and voter
registration drives, Lee's novel provided a powerful narrative that
spoke directly to the moral questions of the day. It gave a generation
of readers, both in America and abroad, a framework for understanding
the deep historical roots of the racial conflicts they were witnessing
on the nightly news.

The book's arrival also coincided with a period of profound global
change. The 1960s was the decade of decolonization across Africa and
Asia, a time when nations were throwing off colonial rule and grappling
with their own legacies of oppression and inequality. The struggle
against apartheid in South Africa was gaining international attention,
and the Cold War framed many global conflicts as a battle between
democracy and authoritarianism. In this international context, *To Kill
a Mockingbird* was received not just as a story about the American
South, but as a universal parable about the fight for human rights, the
nature of justice, and the courage required to stand against an
oppressive majority. Its themes resonated powerfully with a global
audience that was confronting its own histories of colonialism,
prejudice, and the struggle for self-determination.

### A Global History of Censorship and Challenges

The history of attempts to ban *To Kill a Mockingbird* is as long and
complex as the novel's history of praise. The book has been a lightning
rod for controversy since its publication, and the reasons for these
challenges have evolved over time, reflecting the changing social and
cultural anxieties of the societies reading it. The novel has become a
cultural barometer, measuring how conversations about race, language,
education, and representation have transformed over the past six
decades.

Early challenges, from the 1960s through the 1980s, primarily came from
a conservative standpoint. In 1966, the school board in Hanover County,
Virginia, banned the book, calling it an "immoral" and "improper" novel.
Throughout the following decades, challenges in various U.S. school
districts cited its "filthy" and "trashy" content, its use of profanity,
and its frank discussion of rape.<sup>2</sup>

Beginning in the 1980s and continuing to the present day, the focus of
challenges shifted. While the use of racial slurs, particularly the
N-word, has remained a consistent point of contention, the nature of the
objections has changed.<sup>7</sup> Modern challenges often come from a
progressive perspective, arguing that the novel is harmful to Black
students, centers a "white savior" narrative, and ultimately reinforces
rather than challenges racist structures.<sup>8</sup> This critique
argues that the story of Black suffering is told through a white lens
and is used primarily as a vehicle for the moral development of its
white characters.

This controversy is not limited to the United States. In Canada, school
boards in Ontario and Nova Scotia have debated or removed the book from
curricula due to its language and its potential to cause "humiliating
experiences" for students.<sup>8</sup> In the United Kingdom, school
districts in Scotland and Wales have also removed the novel from
required reading lists, citing similar concerns about its racial
perspective and outdated language being "psychologically and
emotionally" harmful to students.<sup>10</sup>

The evolution of these challenges—from being "too immoral" to "not
anti-racist enough"—reveals very little about the book itself, which has
remained unchanged. Instead, it reveals everything about the societies
that read and debate it. The novel functions as a mirror, reflecting
each era's most pressing concerns and its evolving understanding of how
to discuss race, history, and justice in the classroom.

#### Table: A Global History of Censorship and Challenges

| Year | Country/Region | Reason for Challenge/Ban | Outcome | Source(s) |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| 1966 | USA (Hanover County, VA) | Decried as "immoral" and "improper." | Removed from school libraries. |  |
| 1977 | USA (Eden Valley, MN) | Use of vulgar language. | Temporarily banned. |  |
| 1981 | USA (Warren, IN) | Black parents felt it represented "institutionalized racism." | Challenged. |  |
| 1993 | Canada (Hamilton, ON) | Complaint from a parent (details unspecified). | Removed from Grade 10 curriculum. |  |
| 1996 | USA (Lindale, TX) | Content "conflicted with the values of the community." | Banned. |  |
| 2002 | Canada (Nova Scotia) | Objections to depictions of Black people. | Challenge to ban was rejected. |  |
| 2009 | Canada (Brampton, ON) | Complaint about language (use of racial slurs). | Banned from a Grade 10 English course. |  |
| 2017 | USA (Biloxi, MS) | Use of the N-word made students uncomfortable. | Removed from 8th-grade curriculum, later restored as optional with parental permission. |  |
| 2021 | USA (Mukilteo, WA) | Progressive teachers argued it "centers on whiteness." | Removed from the 9th-grade required reading list. | <sup>1</sup> |
| 2021 | UK (Edinburgh, Scotland) | Promotes a "white savior" narrative. | Removed from the curriculum at James Gillespie's High School. | <sup>11</sup> |
| 2024 | UK (Wales) | Inclusion of racial slurs; emotionally harmful for Black children. | Removed from the Welsh GCSE curriculum taught from 2025. | <sup>10</sup> |
| 2024 | Canada (Surrey, BC) | Not from the perspective of a Black man; to be replaced by titles with more agency for marginalized characters. | Dropped from the recommended reading list but not banned; still available in schools. | <sup>8</sup> |

### Part III: The Global Journey

## Chapter 4: ***To Kill a Mockingbird*** on the World Stage: Reception and Criticism

### Initial American Reception: A Mixed Bag

While *To Kill a Mockingbird* is now considered a cornerstone of
American literature, its initial reception was far from uniformly
positive. The novel was an immediate popular success and was awarded the
Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 1961. Many reviewers praised its charm and
moral force. *Time* magazine, for instance, lauded Lee for teaching "an
astonishing number of useful truths about little girls and about
Southern life". However, a significant portion of the literary
establishment, particularly prominent Southern writers, was dismissive.
Flannery O'Connor famously commented, "I think for a child's book it
does all right. It's interesting that all the folks that are buying it
don't know they're reading a child's book". Carson McCullers, another
giant of Southern literature, felt Lee was "poaching on my literary
preserves". These critiques highlight an early tension in the book's
identity: was it a simple children's story or a serious work of national
significance?

### Crossing Borders: Translations and Breakthroughs

The novel's power quickly transcended its American origins. Within a
single year of its publication, it had been translated into ten
languages; today, that number exceeds forty. Each translation represents
not just a linguistic conversion but a cultural negotiation, as the
story of Maycomb was introduced to readers with vastly different
historical contexts and literary traditions.

- **Germany (*Wer die Nachtigall stört* - "Who Disturbs the
  Nightingale"):** The German translation appeared in 1962 and quickly
  became a bestseller.<sup>12</sup> The title, while not a literal
  translation of the American idiom, captures the essence of harming an
  innocent songbird. For German readers in the post-war era, the novel's
  classroom scene discussing Hitler and the persecution of Jews offered
  a unique and powerful point of entry.<sup>13</sup> This chapter forces
  a direct comparison between American racism and Nazi anti-Semitism,
  prompting complex discussions about historical parallels, national
  guilt, and the nature of hypocrisy that resonate differently in a
  German context than anywhere else.

- **France (*Ne tirez pas sur l'oiseau moqueur* - "Don't Shoot the
  Mockingbird"):** The novel's journey in France has been marked by
  several different translations and even titles. An early, reportedly
  problematic translation was titled *Alouette je te plumerai*
  ("Skylark, I Will Pluck You"), a line from a children's song that
  completely misses the novel's symbolic intent.<sup>14</sup> The
  current, more faithful title has allowed the novel to be appreciated
  for its universal themes. French critics have often compared its
  impact and coming-of-age narrative to J.D. Salinger's  
  *The Catcher in the Rye*, highlighting its exploration of childhood
  innocence confronting an adult world of hypocrisy and
  injustice.<sup>16</sup>

- **Russia (*Убить пересмешника* - "To Kill a Mockingbird"):** The novel
  first appeared in the Soviet Union in the literary journal
  *Inostrannaia literatura* ("Foreign Literature") in 1963, followed by
  a book edition in 1964.<sup>17</sup> The translation was done by the
  highly respected duo Nora Gal and Raisa Oblonskaya, whose work is
  still considered the definitive Russian version.<sup>18</sup> The
  reception in Russia has been complex. While the book is respected,
  some readers and commentators have noted that the specific historical
  context of American racial segregation feels "foreign to the Russian
  culture". This illustrates a key aspect of international reception:
  when a reader's national history lacks a direct parallel to the
  central conflict of a novel, its themes may be perceived as more
  abstract or less immediately relatable.

- **Japan (*アラバマ物語* - "Alabama Story"):** The first Japanese
  translation was published in 1975.<sup>19</sup> The chosen title,
  "Alabama Story," is highly significant. It immediately frames the
  novel for Japanese readers not as a metaphorical tale but as a
  quasi-documentary, a realistic portrayal of life in a specific,
  foreign place. This framing influences how the book is read. In
  discussions with Japanese university students, it becomes clear that
  they connect the novel's depiction of racial discrimination to the
  "in-group/out-group" dynamics prevalent in their own society, using
  the American story as a lens to examine issues of social harmony,
  conformity, and discrimination in Japan.<sup>20</sup>

- **China (*杀死一只知更鸟* - "To Kill a Mockingbird"):** The novel is
  widely read in China, where it is often included in university
  curricula and assigned as after-class reading.<sup>21</sup> Chinese
  educators and cultural figures view its themes of justice, prejudice,
  and empathy as universal and highly valuable for students. Stage
  adaptations of the novel have been brought to China specifically as an
  educational tool, with the belief that having students witness and
  even participate in the story is a powerful way to teach them about
  morality and the importance of understanding others.

- **India:** In India, the book is not a formal part of a national
  curriculum but is widely regarded as a classic piece of American
  literature. Online discussions among Indian readers show an
  appreciation for the novel's powerful message and its "damn
  entertaining" courtroom drama, even as some note the initial challenge
  of adapting to the Southern American dialect and child's
  perspective.<sup>22</sup>

## Chapter 5: The Polish Experience with ***Zabić drozda***

### A History of Translation

*To Kill a Mockingbird* first arrived in Poland during the Cold War era,
at a time when access to Western literature was often curated and
politically sensitive. The journey of the book into the Polish language
and literary consciousness has its own distinct history.

- **First Edition (1965):** The first Polish translation was published
  in 1965 under the title *Zabić drozda* ("To Kill a Thrush" - as
  "drozd" is the common word for thrush, though it can encompass
  mockingbirds).<sup>23</sup> The publisher was  
  **Książka i Wiedza**, a major publishing house of the Polish People's
  Republic. The translation was done by **Zofia Kierszys** (1921-2000),
  a prolific and respected translator of English-language literature.
  The distinctive cover for this first edition was designed by artist
  Przemysław Bytoński. This initial publication introduced the story of
  Maycomb to a Polish audience living under a very different social and
  political system.

- **Contemporary Translations:** For decades, the Kierszys translation
  was the standard. However, in the 21st century, a new translation has
  become the most widely available and popular version. This translation
  was done by **Maciej Szymański** and was first published by **Dom
  Wydawniczy Rebis** in the 2010s (sources point to 2012 or 2015). It is
  this Szymański translation that contemporary Polish readers are most
  likely to encounter in bookstores and libraries today.

### In the Polish Classroom: An Absent Classic?

A striking point of contrast between the novel's life in the United
States and in Poland is its role in education. In the U.S., *To Kill a
Mockingbird* is one of the most widely taught novels in secondary
schools.<sup>1</sup> In Poland, however,

*Zabić drozda* is **not** part of the official, mandatory school reading
list (*kanon lektur szkolnych*) set by the Ministry of National
Education.

This absence is a frequent topic of discussion among Polish readers,
teachers, and literary bloggers. A common sentiment expressed in online
reviews and forums is that the book *should* be required reading, given
its powerful and timeless lessons about tolerance, empathy, and social
justice. While it is not a mandatory text, it is plausible that the
novel is used as supplementary reading in some Polish high schools,
particularly in classes that focus on foreign literature or are part of
cultural exchange programs, such as those supported by the U.S. Embassy
in Poland.

### Cultural Resonance and Polish Criticism

Despite its absence from the official curriculum, *Zabić drozda* has
found a dedicated readership in Poland. The novel holds a high rating of
8.1/10 on Lubimyczytać.pl, Poland's largest social cataloging website
for books, based on thousands of user ratings. Polish reviews
consistently praise the book as a wise, moving, and beautifully written
classic that explores profound moral questions through the innocent eyes
of a child.

The way Polish readers connect with the novel reveals a fascinating
dynamic of cultural interpretation. Some Polish commentators have noted
that the specific context of American racial segregation in the 1930s
can feel distant or "not very relatable" to the Polish historical
experience. Poland's history is not defined by the legacy of slavery and
Jim Crow. However, this sense of cultural distance does not lead to a
rejection of the book. Instead, Polish readers often look past the
specific historical setting to embrace the story's universal allegorical
power.

For a nation whose history has been profoundly shaped by foreign
occupation, partitions, the horrors of Nazism and Soviet communism, and
long struggles against authoritarian systems, the core themes of *To
Kill a Mockingbird* are deeply resonant. The story of a principled
individual (Atticus) standing up against a prejudiced and unjust system,
the defense of an innocent victim against a powerful majority, and the
exploration of moral courage in the face of social ostracism are themes
that speak directly to Poland's own historical memory. The novel's power
in Poland, therefore, lies not in its direct reflection of Polish
society, but in its function as a powerful parable. It offers a "safe,"
foreign context through which to explore universal moral questions that
are deeply embedded in the Polish national consciousness.

### Polish Adaptations and Pop Culture

The novel's presence in Poland extends beyond the printed page, though
not into all media.

- **Audiobook:** A Polish-language audiobook version of *Zabić drozda*
  is commercially available, allowing readers to experience the story in
  an auditory format.

- **Graphic Novel:** The 2018 graphic novel adaptation by Fred Fordham
  has been translated into Polish. It was published by **Wydawnictwo
  Jaguar**, making the story accessible to a new generation of readers
  who are drawn to visual narratives.

- **Theater:** Based on available digital archives and theater
  databases, there is no record of a major professional Polish stage
  adaptation of *To Kill a Mockingbird*. While the 1962 film is
  well-known, the story does not appear to have a significant history in
  Polish theater. This absence, when compared to the major Broadway and
  West End productions, is itself a noteworthy aspect of the novel's
  cultural footprint in Poland.

### Part IV: Legacy and Modern Relevance

## Chapter 6: From Page to Screen to Social Media

### The Enduring Film (1962)

Two years after the novel's publication, its legacy was cemented by the
1962 film adaptation directed by Robert Mulligan. With a screenplay by
Horton Foote that won an Academy Award, the film was praised for its
faithful and sensitive translation of the book's spirit to the screen.
The performance of Gregory Peck as Atticus Finch was so definitive that
it earned him the Academy Award for Best Actor and became inextricably
linked with the character in the public imagination. Harper Lee herself
was delighted with the film and formed a lifelong friendship with Peck,
famously giving him her late father's gold pocket watch as a token of
her admiration. The American Film Institute (AFI) has since named
Atticus Finch the greatest movie hero of the 20th century and ranked the
film as the best courtroom drama of all time.

### The Modern Stage (2018)

More than half a century later, the story was reimagined for a new
generation in a major Broadway production with a script by acclaimed
screenwriter Aaron Sorkin.<sup>25</sup> Premiering in 2018, Sorkin's
adaptation made significant structural changes to the narrative. It
begins with the trial of Tom Robinson, using flashbacks to fill in the
backstory, a choice that immediately centers the theme of racial
injustice.<sup>25</sup> Crucially, Sorkin also expanded the roles of the
Black characters, particularly the family's housekeeper, Calpurnia,
giving her a more prominent voice and making her a moral counterpoint to
Atticus. This adaptation, which also had a successful run in London's
West End, reflects a contemporary desire to re-examine the classic story
through a more critical lens, addressing modern critiques about the
novel's focus on a white perspective.<sup>25</sup>

### Visual and Digital Narratives

- **Graphic Novel (2018):** To make the classic story accessible to a
  new audience, a graphic novel adaptation illustrated by Fred Fordham
  was released in 2018.<sup>26</sup> The adaptation was authorized by
  the Harper Lee estate and has been widely praised for its beautiful,
  evocative artwork and its faithfulness to the original
  text.<sup>26</sup> It has been translated into multiple languages,
  including Polish, where it was published by Wydawnictwo Jaguar.

- **Audiobook:** The unabridged audiobook, released in 2014, is narrated
  by Academy Award-winning actress Sissy Spacek. Her performance has
  received widespread acclaim from listeners, who praise her authentic
  Southern accent and her ability to give distinct, subtle voices to the
  various characters, making for an immersive and emotionally resonant
  experience.<sup>27</sup>

### The Digital Afterlife: TikTok, Memes, and Fan Culture

In the 21st century, the cultural life of a classic novel extends far
beyond its printed pages and official adaptations. It lives a parallel,
often fragmented, life in the digital world. An examination of the
novel's presence on a platform like TikTok reveals a fascinating
phenomenon: the decontextualization of a cultural artifact.

Searches for "To Kill a Mockingbird" on the platform yield two dominant,
and largely unrelated, trends. The first is the immense popularity of
the 2004 song "Mockingbird" by the rapper Eminem. The song, which
samples the lullaby "Hush, Little Baby," is an emotional letter to his
daughter and shares only a title with the novel. The second trend
involves viral videos of literal mockingbirds mimicking sounds, from car
alarms to human speech, often with comedic captions.

What is strikingly absent from this mainstream digital discourse is any
significant engagement with the novel's core themes of racism and social
justice. While the title *To Kill a Mockingbird* has achieved a new
level of ubiquity through these trends, it has been almost entirely
stripped of its original meaning and context. This demonstrates how
social media can amplify a cultural reference to the point of complete
saturation while simultaneously severing it from the very text that gave
it significance. The book now leads a double life as a meme, often
completely divorced from its powerful story.

Alongside this decontextualized mainstream presence, more traditional
forms of digital fandom persist. On platforms like Archive of Our Own
(AO3), fans write and share fanfiction that explores character
relationships, fills in narrative gaps, or imagines "what if"
scenarios.<sup>28</sup> On DeviantArt, artists create and share fan art
depicting their interpretations of the characters and
scenes.<sup>29</sup> These communities represent a deeper, more
text-focused engagement with the novel, existing in parallel to the
broader, more superficial trends on platforms like TikTok.

## Chapter 7: Why It Still Matters: A Guide for Young Readers

### Quotes That Hit Different

The enduring power of *To Kill a Mockingbird* lies in its
language—simple, direct, and profoundly wise. Certain lines have
resonated with readers for decades, becoming some of the most
highlighted and shared passages in literature. Here are some of the most
iconic quotes, presented in both English and their Polish translation by
Maciej Szymański, as found on Polish literary forums.<sup>30</sup>

- **On Empathy:**

  - **English:** "You never really understand a person until you
    consider things from his point of view... until you climb into his
    skin and walk around in it."

  - **Polish:** *„Nigdy do końca nie zrozumiesz drugiego człowieka, póki
    nie rozważysz spraw z jego punktu widzenia… dopóki nie wejdziesz w
    jego skórę i nie pożyjesz w niej trochę.”*

- **On Conscience:**

  - **English:** "The one thing that doesn't abide by majority rule is a
    person's conscience."

  - **Polish:** *„Jedyna rzecz, jaka nie podlega przegłosowaniu przez
    większość, to sumienie człowieka.”*

- **On Courage:**

  - **English:** "I wanted you to see what real courage is, instead of
    getting the idea that courage is a man with a gun in his hand. It's
    when you know you're licked before you begin, but you begin anyway
    and see it through no matter what."

  - **Polish:** *„(…) i żeby nigdy nie przyszło Ci do głowy, że odważny
    jest człowiek z pistoletem w ręku. Odważny jest ten, kto wie, że
    przegra, zanim jeszcze rozpocznie walkę, lecz mimo to zaczyna i
    prowadzi ją do końca bez względu na wszystko.”*

- **On Innocence (The Title):**

  - **English:** "Shoot all the bluejays you want, if you can hit 'em,
    but remember it's a sin to kill a mockingbird."

  - **Polish:** *„Strąć tyle sójek, ile dusza zapragnie, jeśli uda ci
    się trafić, ale pamiętaj, że grzechem jest zabić drozda.”*

- **On Humanity:**

  - **English:** "I think there's just one kind of folks. Folks."

  - **Polish:** *„Myślę, że jest tylko jeden rodzaj ludzi. Ludzie.”*

- **On the Love of Reading:**

  - **English:** "Until I feared I would lose it, I never loved to read.
    One does not love breathing."

  - **Polish:** *„Aż do chwili, gdy się przestraszyłam, że stracę tę
    umiejętność, nie kochałam czytania. Bo czy można kochać
    oddychanie?”*

#### Warning: Common Misquotes

As with any famous work, quotes can be slightly altered or misattributed
over time. Always verify a quote against a reliable copy of the text.
For example, the line about courage is sometimes shortened to "Real
courage is when you know you're licked before you begin..." While the
sentiment is the same, the full quote, including the context of Atticus
speaking to Jem about Mrs. Dubose, is more powerful.

### Relatable Themes for Gen Z

Though set nearly a century ago, the core themes of *To Kill a
Mockingbird* speak directly to the concerns of young people today.

- **Social Justice and Activism:** The novel is, at its heart, a story
  about confronting systemic injustice. Atticus Finch's lonely stand
  against the racism of his community provides a powerful, if complex,
  model for modern activism. The story's exploration of a flawed legal
  system and the consequences of prejudice are directly relevant to
  contemporary movements like Black Lives Matter and ongoing global
  conversations about racial equity.

- **Empathy vs. "Cancel Culture":** Atticus's central lesson—to "climb
  into another person's skin" before judging them—offers a challenging
  perspective in the age of social media. The novel encourages a deep,
  nuanced empathy that pushes back against snap judgments and the rapid
  condemnation often seen online.

- **Coming of Age and Finding Your Voice:** Scout's journey from
  childhood innocence to a more complex moral understanding is a
  universal experience. Her struggle to be herself—a tomboy who prefers
  overalls to dresses—in a society that tries to force her into a
  specific gender role is a powerful story of identity and
  self-discovery that resonates with young people navigating their own
  identities today.<sup>1</sup>

- **Challenging the Status Quo:** The novel is a testament to the idea
  that one person, and one family, can challenge the deeply ingrained
  prejudices of their society. It shows that standing up for what is
  right is often unpopular and difficult, but ultimately necessary—a
  message that continues to inspire young activists around the world.

### How to Spot Good Sources: A Student's Guide

In an age of information overload, knowing how to tell a reliable source
from a questionable one is a superpower. Whether you're writing a school
paper, engaging in an online debate, or just trying to understand the
world, using good sources is crucial. Here's a guide to help you
navigate your research.

- **🟢 Trust these sources:** These are your go-to for reliable,
  fact-checked information.

  - **University websites (.edu,.ac.uk,.edu.pl, etc.):** These are home
    to academic research and scholarly articles.

  - **Peer-Reviewed Journals:** These are publications where articles
    are vetted by other experts in the field before being published.
    Look for a "" label or check the journal's website.

  - **Published Academic Books (with an ISBN):** Books from reputable
    university presses or academic publishers are thoroughly researched
    and edited.

  - **Major Museums and Cultural Institutions:** Organizations like the
    Smithsonian, the British Library, or national archives provide
    well-documented information.

  - **Established Newspapers with Fact-Checking Standards:** Reputable
    news outlets like *The New York Times*, *The Guardian*, or *Gazeta
    Wyborcza* have a public commitment to accuracy.

  - **Author's Official Estate or Foundation:** These organizations are
    dedicated to preserving the author's legacy and often hold primary
    source materials.

  - **Polish Trusted Sources:** Look for resources like **Culture.pl**,
    **Instytut Książki** (The Book Institute), and digital university
    repositories like **RCIN** (Repozytorium Cyfrowe Instytutów
    Naukowych).

- **🟡 Use with caution:** These sources can be useful starting points,
  but you must verify their claims with more reliable sources.

  - **Wikipedia:** A great place to get an overview and find sources
    (check the references at the bottom of the page!), but never cite
    Wikipedia itself in a formal paper.

  - **Popular Blogs:** Some blogs are written by experts, but many are
    not. Always check the author's credentials and look for their
    sources.

  - **YouTube Videos:** A video essay from a university professor is
    more reliable than one from an anonymous creator. Check the video
    description for sources and creator information.

  - **Social Media Posts:** Can be a source of breaking news or public
    opinion, but they require rigorous verification from trusted sources
    before being cited as fact.

  - **Polish Sources:** Reader review sites like **Lubimyczytać.pl** are
    excellent for gauging popular opinion but are not scholarly sources.
    Student homework-help forums like **sciaga.pl** should be approached
    with extreme caution as they may contain errors or plagiarized
    content.

- **🔴 Avoid these:** These sources are generally unreliable and should
  not be used for serious research.

  - **Anonymous Posts without Sources:** If you can't tell who wrote it
    or where they got their information, you can't trust it.

  - **Sites with Excessive Ads and Clickbait:** These sites are designed
    to generate revenue, not to provide accurate information.

  - **Outdated Information:** Always check the publication or update
    date. An article about scientific or historical consensus from 1995
    may no longer be accurate.

  - **AI-Generated Content without Human Verification:** AI tools can be
    helpful for brainstorming, but they can also "hallucinate" or invent
    facts and sources. Always verify AI-generated information with
    trusted human-vetted sources.

  - **Polish Warning:** Be very wary of sites like **Bryka.pl** and
    similar "opracowania" (summary) websites. They are notorious for
    containing factual errors, oversimplifications, and outdated
    interpretations.

**Pro Tip:** If a fact sounds too wild or too good to be true, apply the
"Rule of Three." Try to find at least two or three different,
independent, reliable sources that confirm the same piece of information
before you trust it.

## Conclusion: The Enduring Song of the Mockingbird

More than sixty years after its publication, *To Kill a Mockingbird*
remains a vital and volatile text. Its journey from a heavily revised
manuscript to a global cultural phenomenon is a testament to its
profound moral clarity and narrative power. It is a book that has been
embraced and rejected, celebrated as a timeless lesson in empathy and
condemned as an outdated relic.

Yet, its enduring relevance lies precisely in this tension. The story of
Maycomb is no longer just a story about the American South. It has
become a global Rorschach test, a story onto which different cultures
and generations project their own struggles with justice, prejudice, and
the difficult, necessary work of seeing the humanity in others. Whether
read in English in a Mississippi classroom, in Polish in a Warsaw
apartment, or in Japanese in a Tokyo university, the novel asks the same
fundamental questions: Who are the mockingbirds in our own society? What
does it take to defend them? And what is the cost of silence? The song
of the mockingbird, it turns out, is a universal one, and the sin of
killing it is a lesson the world is still learning.

## Bibliography

### A. Primary Sources

- Lee, Harper. *To Kill a Mockingbird*. J.B. Lippincott & Co., 1960.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lee, Harper. *Go Set a Watchman*. HarperCollins, 2015. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lee, Harper. *Zabić drozda*. Translated by Zofia Kierszys, Książka i
  Wiedza, 1965. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lee, Harper. *Zabić drozda*. Translated by Maciej Szymański, Dom
  Wydawniczy Rebis, 2015. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lee, Harper. *Ne tirez pas sur l'oiseau moqueur*. Translated by
  Isabelle Stoïanov, reviewed by Isabelle Hausser, Éditions de
  Fallois, 2005. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lee, Harper. *Wer die Nachtigall stört*. Translated by Claire
  Malignon, Rowohlt Verlag, 1962. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lee, Harper. *Убить пересмешника* (Ubit' peresmeshnika). Translated by
  Nora Gal and Raisa Oblonskaya, Molodaya Gvardiya, 1964. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lee, Harper. *アラバマ物語* (Arabama Monogatari). Translated by
  Kikuchi Jūzaburō, Kurashi no Techō Sha, 1975. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lee, Harper. *杀死一只知更鸟* (Shāsǐ yī zhī zhī gēng niǎo). Yilin
  Press, 2017. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

### B. Secondary Sources

#### Polish Sources

- Bonito.pl. "Zabić drozda." Product Page. Accessed July 24, 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐

- *Cała Polska czyta dzieciom*. "Zabić drozda." Book Profile. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Czas na Komiks*. "Harper Lee – Zabić drozda – recenzja." Review.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- DKK Wojewódzka i Miejska Biblioteka Publiczna w Łodzi. "Recenzja
  powieści Harper Lee 'Zabić drozda'." Review. Accessed July 24, 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐

- Empik. "Zabić drozda." Product Page. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Enbook.pl*. "TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD." Product Page. Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Inna Bajka*. "Zabić drozda - obowiązkowa lektura z Wydawnictwa
  Jaguar." Review. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Klasyka Literatury i Filmu*. "Harper Lee – Zabić drozda. Opis,
  omówienie, analiza, recenzja, opracowanie." Analysis. Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Kotka, wino i książki*. "„Zabić drozda” – Harper Lee – recenzja."
  Review. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Krakowczyta.pl*. "Zabić drozda." Book Profile. Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Kropla Morza*. "Tag: Zabić drozda." Blog Post. Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐

- *Kulturonieznawczyni*. "Dlaczego nie tylko dżentelmeni nie powinni
  zabijać drozdów?" Blog Post. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Legalna Kultura*. "Tydzień Zakazanych Książek." Article. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Literackie Skarby*. "Rzeź ptaków śpiewających - 'Zabić drozda',
  Harper Lee." Review. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- Lubimyczytac.pl. "Zabić drozda." Book Profile and Reviews. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- Lubimyczytac.pl. "Cytaty z książki 'Zabić drozda'." Quote Catalog.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>30</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- Maciej, Klaudyna. "Amerykańskie lektury szkolne." Blog Post. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- Miejska Biblioteka Publiczna w Siedlcach. "Harper Lee, Zabić drozda."
  DKK Review. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Nakanapie.pl*. "Zabić drozda." Book Profile and Quotes. Accessed July
  24, 2025. <sup>31</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *Nakanapie.pl*. "Historia zasadniczo dobrych ludzi – Zabić drozda.
  Powieść graficzna." Review. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Onet Kultura*. "'Zabić drozda' znika z listy lektur szkolnych.
  Krytycy: powrót cenzury." News Article. Accessed July 24, 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- OneBid.pl. "Lee Harper- Zabić drozda \[wydanie pierwsze 1965\]."
  Auction Listing. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>32</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Podróże z klasą*. "'Zabić drozda. Powieść graficzna' – recenzja."
  Review. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Poemax.pl*. "Zabić drozda." Forum Post. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐

- *RCIN*. "Polska Bibliografia Literacka." Digital Archive. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *SFP*. "Zabić drozda." Film Profile. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Świat Bibliofila*. "ZABIĆ DROZDA - Harper Lee \[recenzja\]." Review.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Taniaksiazka.pl*. "Zabić drozda." Product Page and Reviews. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- Tezeusz.pl. "Zabić drozda." Product Listing. Accessed July 24, 2025.
  <sup>23</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *3telnia.pl*. "'Zabić drozda' – recenzja." Review. Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Wianki Słów*. "Lista lektur szkolnych – samo zło czy dobro narodowe?"
  Blog Post. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (Polish). "Zabić drozda (film)." Accessed July 24, 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (Polish). "Zabić drozda." Accessed July 24, 2025.
  <sup>24</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (Polish). "Zofia Kierszys." Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Wyborcza.pl*. "Do czego służy kanon lektur szkolnych." Article.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Wydawnictwo Jaguar. "Zabić drozda." Product Page. Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Zuch.media*. "Zabić drozda – książka, którą TRZEBA przeczytać."
  Review. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

#### Academic Sources (Books, Journals, Dissertations)

- *Atlantis Press*. "To Kill a Mockingbird: A Disciplined Society under
  the Panopticon." *Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities
  Research*, vol. 631, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Braun, Stuart. "Black Lives Matter: Kontroverse um Bestseller von
  Harper Lee." *Deutsche Welle*, 11 July 2020.\[German\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Crespino, Joseph. "The Strange Career of Atticus Finch." *Southern
  Cultures*, vol. 6, no. 2, 2000, pp. 9-29. (Referenced in) ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- DiPiero, Thomas. "Two Ways of Looking at a Mockingbird." *Rochester
  Review*, vol. 73, no. 1, 2011. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Gale Literature Resource Center*. "To Kill a Mockingbird." Database
  entry. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Hovet, Theodore, and Grace-Ann Hovet. "'Fine Fancy Gentlemen' and
  'Yappy Folks': Contending Voices in To Kill a Mockingbird." *Southern
  Quarterly*, vol. 40, no. 1, 2001, pp. 67-78. (Referenced in)
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lagutina, Irina. "Linguistic Racism in Harper Lee's Novel 'To Kill a
  Mockingbird' and Its Manifestation in Russian and American Culture."
  Student Thesis, HSE University, 2020. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Lubet, Steven. "Reconstructing Atticus Finch." *Michigan Law Review*,
  vol. 97, no. 6, 1999, pp. 1339-62. (Referenced in) ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Murray, Jennifer. "More Than One Way to Play the Game: The Magic of To
  Kill a Mockingbird." *The Southern Literary Journal*, vol. 42, no. 1,
  2009, pp. 101-119. (Referenced in) ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Papke, David R. "Au Revoir To Kill a Mockingbird." *Marquette
  University Law School Faculty Blog*, 15 Mar. 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *ResearchGate*. "Literary Texts as a Source of Personality Formation:
  A Case Study of To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee." Publication
  388178556, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Saini, Vandana. "Power Mechanism in To Kill a Mockingbird." *Research
  Scholar: An International Refereed e-Journal of Literary
  Explorations*, vol. 3, no. 2, 2015. (Referenced in) ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Stow, Simon. "To Kill a Mockingbird: What Maycomb Knew about Hitler
  (and Why It Matters)." *Perspectives on Politics*, vol. 18, no. 4,
  2020, pp. 1066-1080. <sup>13</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Sundquist, Eric J. *The House Divided: A Study of the Civil War*.
  Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983. (Referenced in) ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Tavernier-Courbin, Jacqueline. "Humor and Humanity in To Kill a
  Mockingbird." *On Harper Lee: Essays and Reflections*, edited by Alice
  Hall Petry, University of Tennessee Press, 2007, pp. 41-60. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Ward, L. "Atticus Finch: A Troubled Hero." *University of Chicago
  Public Law & Legal Theory Working Paper*, no. 297, 2010. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Wojtas, Justyna. "Entrapped by Society: The Motif of Imprisonment in
  Fordham's and Lee's Graphic Novel Adaptation of To Kill a
  Mockingbird." *Text Matters: A Journal of Literature, Theory and
  Culture*, no. 13, 2023, pp. 317-333. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Popular Sources (Reputable Magazines, Newspapers, Documentaries)

- *Booklips.pl*. "Powstaje komiksowa adaptacja 'Zabić drozda' Harper
  Lee." News Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *China Christian Daily*. "Reread 'To Kill a Mockingbird' After the
  'Chained Chinese Mother of 8' Issue." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐

- *China Daily*. "To Kill a Mockingbird to be staged in China." Article.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *El País (English Edition)*. "Racism unmasked: The lessons of 'To Kill
  a Mockingbird'." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Entertainment Weekly*. "Harper Lee: To Kill A Mockingbird Kindle
  highlights." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Global Times*. "Stage adaptation of 'To Kill a Mockingbird' resonates
  with Chinese students." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>21</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *History.com*. "'To Kill a Mockingbird' published." Article. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. <sup>4</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *History.com*. "Why 'To Kill a Mockingbird' Keeps Getting Banned."
  Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *The Jerusalem Post*. "What's new in Israeli film? - review." Article.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *The Jewish Press*. "Harper Lee, 'To Kill a Mockingbird,' and the
  Jews." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>33</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Newsweek Japan*.
  "なぜ『ものまね鳥を殺すのは』はアメリカで最も愛される小説なのか."
  Article. Accessed July 24, 2025.\[Japanese\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *PBS NewsHour*. "'To Kill A Mockingbird' remains among top banned
  classical novels." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>2</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *PBS NewsHour*. "How newspapers reviewed 'To Kill A Mockingbird' in
  1960." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Der Spiegel*. "Harper Lee: Nach Wer die Nachtigall stört zweiter
  Roman mit 88 Jahren." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025.\[German\]
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *The Standard*. "Of Mice And Men and To Kill A Mockingbird removed
  from Welsh GCSE curriculum." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025.
  <sup>10</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Time Magazine*. "Here Are the 5 Most Popular To Kill a Mockingbird
  Quotes." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Digital Sources (Websites, Databases, Digital Archives)

- *AbeBooks*. "Ne tirez pas sur l'oiseau moqueur - roman (French
  Edition)." Product Listing. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Albertine*. "Ne tirez pas sur l'oiseau moqueur." Product Page.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>16</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)*. "13 'Woke' Books Banned in
  DoD Schools." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *AnyLang*. "Book To Kill a Mockingbird, summary (Ne tirez pas sur
  l'oiseau moqueur) in French." Resource Page. Accessed July 24, 2025.
  ⭐⭐

- *AnyLang*. "Book To Kill a Mockingbird, summary (Wer die Nachtigall
  stört) in German." Resource Page. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐

- *Archive of Our Own*. "To Kill a Mockingbird (1962)." Fanfiction Works
  Listing. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>28</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *Art of Smart*. "50 To Kill a Mockingbird Quotes." Educational
  Resource. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Audiobooks.com*. "To Kill a Mockingbird." Audiobook Page. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. <sup>27</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Audible*. "To Kill a Mockingbird Audiobook." Product Page. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Banned Books Week*. "Banned Spotlight: To Kill a Mockingbird."
  Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Barnes & Noble*. "To Kill a Mockingbird: A Graphic Novel." Product
  Page. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Bartleby*. "Historical Context Of To Kill A Mockingbird." Essay.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐

- *Biblio.com*. " To Kill a Mockingbird \[Ubyt peresmeshnika\]."
  Listing. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>34</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *Bookvica*. "FIRST RUSSIAN TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD." Listing. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. <sup>18</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *CBC News*. "Surrey drops 4 books from recommended school reading
  list." News Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *CityNews Vancouver*. "Surrey schools' book decision not a ban,
  district says." News Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>8</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Denver Center for the Performing Arts*. "Court Cases that Inspired To
  Kill a Mockingbird." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>6</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *DeviantArt*. "Explore the Best Tkam Art." Tag Search. Accessed July
  24, 2025. <sup>29</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *Facing History & Ourselves*. "Teaching Mockingbird." Resource Guide.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Fishtank Learning*. "8th Grade ELA - To Kill a Mockingbird."
  Curriculum Unit. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Goodreads*. Blog Posts and Quote Pages. Accessed July 24, 2025.
  ⭐⭐⭐

- *Goodreads*. "To Kill a Mockingbird: A Graphic Novel." Book Profile.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>26</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *Hayakawa Books*. "『ものまね鳥を殺すのは
  アラバマ物語〔新訳版〕』「訳者あとがき」公開." Article. Accessed July
  24, 2025.\[Japanese\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *The Indian Book Club*. "To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee." Review.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>35</sup> ⭐⭐

- *JSTOR Daily*. "To Debate a Mockingbird: The Literary Legacy of Harper
  Lee." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Monroe County Museum*. "Harper Lee Timeline." Webpage. Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *National Museum of African American History and Culture*. "The
  Scottsboro Boys." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>5</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *PBS*. "American Masters: Harper Lee: Hey, Boo." Video Resource.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *PC(USA) World Mission*. "A Letter from Thomas Goetz, serving in
  Japan." Article. Accessed July 24, 2025. <sup>20</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Penguin Random House Canada*. "15 Frequently Banned & Challenged
  Books." List. Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- *Poirier Exblog*. "To kill a mockingbird." Blog Post. Accessed July
  24, 2025.\[Japanese\] ⭐⭐⭐

- *Reddit*. Various Subreddits (r/AskEurope, r/TranslationStudies,
  r/Eminem, r/Indianbooks, etc.). User Discussions. Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐

- *SparkNotes*. "To Kill a Mockingbird: Context." Study Guide. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. <sup>3</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *SparkNotes*. "To Kill a Mockingbird: Symbols." Study Guide. Accessed
  July 24, 2025. <sup>36</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- *The Greatest Books*. "To Kill a Mockingbird." Database Entry.
  Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (English). "To Kill a Mockingbird." Accessed July 24, 2025.
  <sup>1</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (English). "To Kill a Mockingbird (film)." Accessed July
  24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (English). "To Kill a Mockingbird (2018 play)." Accessed
  July 24, 2025. <sup>25</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (German). "Wer die Nachtigall stört." Accessed July
  24, 2025. <sup>12</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (Japanese). "アラバマ物語 (小説)." Accessed July 24, 2025.
  <sup>19</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- Wikipedia (Chinese). "梅岡城故事." Accessed July 24, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

#### Multimedia (Films, Podcasts, YouTube Channels)

- *Film: To Kill a Mockingbird*. Directed by Robert Mulligan, Universal
  Pictures, 1962. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Play: To Kill a Mockingbird*. Written by Aaron Sorkin, 2018.
  <sup>25</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *La Grande Librairie - France Télévisions*. "HARPER LEE / NE TIREZ PAS
  SUR L'OISEAU MOQUEUR / LA P'TITE LIBRAIRIE." YouTube, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

- *PBS NewsHour*. "How Aaron Sorkin's 'To Kill A Mockingbird' is
  different from the book." YouTube, 2019. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- *Supposedly Fun*. "Why is To Kill a Mockingbird America's Favorite
  Book?" YouTube, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

### C. Missing Sources Note

- **Topics Where Reliable Sources Couldn't Be Found:**

  - Detailed academic criticism or reception history for *To Kill a
    Mockingbird* in several linguistic contexts, including Arabic,
    Hindi, and Portuguese. While translations exist, scholarly
    engagement from these regions was not present in the provided
    research materials.

  - Information on the first Polish translator, Zofia Kierszys, beyond
    her name and dates. Her specific approach to the translation or any
    controversies surrounding the 1965 edition could not be documented.

  - Specific data on the inclusion or exclusion of the novel in Polish
    university curricula. While its absence from the national high
    school curriculum is noted, its status in higher education requires
    further research in Polish academic databases.

- **Claims That Need Verification:**

  - The exact publication date of the first edition of the Maciej
    Szymański Polish translation. Sources vary between 2012 and 2015.

  - The full history of French translations prior to the 1989 Isabelle
    Stoïanov version, particularly the details of the *Alouette je te
    plumerai* edition.

- **Areas Requiring Further Research:**

  - A comparative analysis of the Zofia Kierszys (1965) and Maciej
    Szymański (2015) Polish translations to identify differences in
    style, tone, and interpretation.

  - The reception of the novel in post-colonial nations in Africa and
    Asia, where themes of racial injustice and legal inequality might
    resonate in unique ways.

  - The reception and critical analysis of *Go Set a Watchman* in
    international contexts, particularly in Poland, to see how the
    revised portrayal of Atticus Finch was understood.

#### Cytowane prace

1.  To Kill a Mockingbird - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/To_Kill_a_Mockingbird</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/To_Kill_a_Mockingbird)

2.  'To Kill A Mockingbird' remains among top banned classical novels \|
    PBS News, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.pbs.org/newshour/education/to-kill-a-mockingbird-remains-among-top-banned-classical-novels</u>](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/education/to-kill-a-mockingbird-remains-among-top-banned-classical-novels)

3.  Harper Lee and To Kill a Mockingbird Background \| SparkNotes,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/mocking/context/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/mocking/context/)

4.  “To Kill a Mockingbird” published \| July 11, 1960 \| HISTORY,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/july-11/harper-lee-to-kill-a-mockingbird-published</u>](https://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/july-11/harper-lee-to-kill-a-mockingbird-published)

5.  The Scottsboro Boys \| National Museum of African American History
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://nmaahc.si.edu/explore/stories/scottsboro-boys</u>](https://nmaahc.si.edu/explore/stories/scottsboro-boys)

6.  Court Cases that Inspired To Kill a Mockingbird - Denver Center for
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.denvercenter.org/news-center/court-cases-that-inspired-to-kill-a-mockingbird/</u>](https://www.denvercenter.org/news-center/court-cases-that-inspired-to-kill-a-mockingbird/)

7.  „Zabić drozda”, „Przygody Hucka” i „Myszy i ludzie” usunięte z listy
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/aktualnosci/14840/zabic-drozda-przygody-hucka-i-myszy-i-ludzie-usuniete-z-listy-lektur-w-amerykanskim-burbank</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/aktualnosci/14840/zabic-drozda-przygody-hucka-i-myszy-i-ludzie-usuniete-z-listy-lektur-w-amerykanskim-burbank)

8.  Surrey Schools: To Kill a Mockingbird not a recommended resource,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://vancouver.citynews.ca/2024/02/29/surrey-schools-books-mockingbird-resources/</u>](https://vancouver.citynews.ca/2024/02/29/surrey-schools-books-mockingbird-resources/)

9.  Certain books continue to cause an uproar in Canadian education ...,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://globalnews.ca/news/4571476/banned-books-in-canadian-schools/</u>](https://globalnews.ca/news/4571476/banned-books-in-canadian-schools/)

10. Of Mice And Men and To Kill A Mockingbird removed from Welsh ...,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/welsh-gcse-english-english-literature-american-b1201635.html</u>](https://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/welsh-gcse-english-english-literature-american-b1201635.html)

11. How to kill a mockingbird and, incidentally… - Revista Íconema,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://iconema.com.mx/how-to-kill-a-mockingbird-and-incidentally-eurocentrism/?lang=en</u>](https://iconema.com.mx/how-to-kill-a-mockingbird-and-incidentally-eurocentrism/?lang=en)

12. Wer die Nachtigall stört – Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wer_die_Nachtigall_st%C3%B6rt</u>](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wer_die_Nachtigall_st%C3%B6rt)

13. To Kill a Mockingbird: What Maycomb Knew about Hitler (and ... -
    AWS, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://wmit-pages-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/10/2020/12/22202516/What-Maycomb-Knew-About-Hitler.pdf</u>](https://wmit-pages-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/10/2020/12/22202516/What-Maycomb-Knew-About-Hitler.pdf)

14. To Kill a Mockingbird — Wikipédia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/To_Kill_a_Mockingbird</u>](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/To_Kill_a_Mockingbird)

15. Oiseaux moqueurs (Carnet du traducteur) - Michel Volkovitch,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>http://volkovitch.com/rub_carnet.asp?a=pe52</u>](http://volkovitch.com/rub_carnet.asp?a=pe52)

16. Ne tirez pas sur l'oiseau moqueur - ALBERTINE, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.albertine.com/book/ne-tirez-pas-sur-loiseau-moqueur/</u>](https://www.albertine.com/book/ne-tirez-pas-sur-loiseau-moqueur/)

17. Title in Cyrillic and English : Ubit peresmeshnika / To Kill a ...,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.betweenthecovers.com/pages/books/404394/harper-lee/title-in-cyrillic-and-english-ubit-peresmeshnika-to-kill-a-mockingbird</u>](https://www.betweenthecovers.com/pages/books/404394/harper-lee/title-in-cyrillic-and-english-ubit-peresmeshnika-to-kill-a-mockingbird)

18. FIRST RUSSIAN TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD Ubit' peresmeshnika i.e. To Kill
    a Mockingbird / translated by N. Gal' and R. Obolenskaya \| Harper
    Lee - Bookvica, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bookvica.com/pages/books/32/harper-lee/first-russian-to-kill-a-mockingbird-ubit-peresmeshnika-i-e-to-kill-a-mockingbird-translated-by-n-gal?soldItem=true</u>](https://www.bookvica.com/pages/books/32/harper-lee/first-russian-to-kill-a-mockingbird-ubit-peresmeshnika-i-e-to-kill-a-mockingbird-translated-by-n-gal?soldItem=true)

19. アラバマ物語 (小説) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E3%82%A2%E3%83%A9%E3%83%90%E3%83%9E%E7%89%A9%E8%AA%9E\_(%E5%B0%8F%E8%AA%AC)</u>](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E3%82%A2%E3%83%A9%E3%83%90%E3%83%9E%E7%89%A9%E8%AA%9E_(%E5%B0%8F%E8%AA%AC))

20. “To Kill a Mockingbird” from a Japanese Perspective \| Presbyterian
    Church (U.S.A.), otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://pcusa.org/kill-mockingbird-japanese-perspective</u>](https://pcusa.org/kill-mockingbird-japanese-perspective)

21. Educators use classic stage plays to teach young students - Global
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/201705/1048443.shtml</u>](https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/201705/1048443.shtml)

22. To Kill a Mocking Bird Review : r/Indianbooks - Reddit, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/Indianbooks/comments/1caftt8/to_kill_a_mocking_bird_review/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/Indianbooks/comments/1caftt8/to_kill_a_mocking_bird_review/)

23. Zabić drozda - Harper Lee \| książka w tezeusz.pl książki promocje
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://tezeusz.pl/zabic-drozda-lee-harper-870284</u>](https://tezeusz.pl/zabic-drozda-lee-harper-870284)

24. Zabić drozda – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zabi%C4%87_drozda</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zabi%C4%87_drozda)

25. To Kill a Mockingbird (2018 play) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/To_Kill_a_Mockingbird\_(2018_play)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/To_Kill_a_Mockingbird_(2018_play))

26. To Kill a Mockingbird: A Graphic Novel by Fred Fordham \| Goodreads,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/38359009-to-kill-a-mockingbird</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/38359009-to-kill-a-mockingbird)

27. Listen Free to To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee with a Free
    Trial., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.audiobooks.com/audiobook/to-kill-a-mockingbird/213291</u>](https://www.audiobooks.com/audiobook/to-kill-a-mockingbird/213291)

28. To Kill a Mockingbird (1962) - Works \| Archive of Our Own,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://archiveofourown.org/tags/To%20Kill%20a%20Mockingbird%20(1962)/works</u>](https://archiveofourown.org/tags/To%20Kill%20a%20Mockingbird%20(1962)/works)

29. Explore the Best Tkam Art \| DeviantArt, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.deviantart.com/tag/tkam</u>](https://www.deviantart.com/tag/tkam)

30. Zabić drozda cytaty \| Lubimyczytać.pl, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/cytaty/270109/ksiazka/zabic-drozda</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/cytaty/270109/ksiazka/zabic-drozda)

31. Zabić drozda - cytaty, recenzje, opinie - nakanapie.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://nakanapie.pl/ksiazka/zabic-drozda-916034/cytaty</u>](https://nakanapie.pl/ksiazka/zabic-drozda-916034/cytaty)

32. Lee Harper- Zabić drozda \[wydanie pierwsze 1965\]\[bardzo ładny
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://onebid.pl/pl/ksiazki-i-starodruki-lee-harper-zabic-drozda-wydanie-pierwsze-1965-bardzo-ladny-stan/1722422</u>](https://onebid.pl/pl/ksiazki-i-starodruki-lee-harper-zabic-drozda-wydanie-pierwsze-1965-bardzo-ladny-stan/1722422)

33. Harper Lee, To Kill A Mockingbird, And The Jews \| The Jewish Press
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.jewishpress.com/sections/features/features-on-jewish-world/harper-lee-to-kill-a-mockingbird-and-the-jews/2020/07/15/</u>](https://www.jewishpress.com/sections/features/features-on-jewish-world/harper-lee-to-kill-a-mockingbird-and-the-jews/2020/07/15/)

34. \[First Russian translation\] To Kill a Mockingbird \[Ubyt ... -
    Biblio, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.biblio.com/book/first-russian-translation-kill-mockingbird-ubyt/d/1423372243</u>](https://www.biblio.com/book/first-russian-translation-kill-mockingbird-ubyt/d/1423372243)

35. To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee - The Indian Book Club,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://theindianbookclub.com/readers-point/f/to-kill-a-mockingbird-by-harper-lee</u>](https://theindianbookclub.com/readers-point/f/to-kill-a-mockingbird-by-harper-lee)

36. To Kill a Mockingbird: Symbols - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/mocking/symbols/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/mocking/symbols/)
