# ***Jane Eyre***: An International Field Guide to a Rebel Soul

Original Title: Jane Eyre: An Autobiography

Original Language: English

Publication Date: October 16, 1847 1

Original Publisher: Smith, Elder, and Co., London 2

### **Why Should I Care?**

Imagine being told you’re not good enough. That you’re too poor, too
plain, too quiet, too intense. Imagine a world that constantly tries to
fit you into a box, to define you by your circumstances rather than by
your spirit. Now, imagine finding the courage to look that world in the
eye and declare, "I am not a machine without feelings... I have as much
soul as you—and full as much heart!".<sup>4</sup> That is the
electrifying core of

*Jane Eyre*.

Written over 175 years ago by Charlotte Brontë, a fiercely intelligent
woman who had to hide behind a male name to be heard, this novel is more
than just a Gothic romance with a brooding hero and a haunted
mansion.<sup>1</sup> It is the story of a fight for self-worth. Jane's
journey from an unloved orphan to an independent woman who refuses to
sacrifice her integrity for love or security is a powerful blueprint for
anyone trying to build an identity on their own terms.<sup>6</sup> In an
age of social media pressure and curated identities, Jane’s struggle to
be valued for her true self—her mind, her principles, her passions—is
more relevant than ever. This is not just a classic book; it's a
survival guide for the soul.

### **Skip to This Part If...**

- **You love a good origin story and want to debunk some myths:** Jump
  to **Part I: The Girl Who Wrote Herself into the World**.

- **You're fascinated by how stories change across cultures and
  languages:** Head to **Part II: A Journey Through Translation's
  Prism**.

- **Chcesz wiedzieć, jak Polska przyjęła Jane Eyre (You want to know how
  Poland received Jane Eyre):** Go directly to **Section 3: Special
  Focus: The "Strange Fate" of *Jane Eyre* in Poland**.

- **You're here for the deep literary analysis of symbols and secrets:**
  Dive into **Part III: Deconstructing the Story**.

- **You want to see how the book holds up on screen and online today:**
  Check out **Part IV: *Jane Eyre* in the 21st Century**.

## Part I: The Girl Who Wrote Herself into the World

### "I am No Bird; and No Net Ensnares Me": The Creation of ***Jane Eyre***

#### From Personal Pain to Literary Power

The raw, emotional power of *Jane Eyre* stems from the fact that its
author, Charlotte Brontë, lived many of its hardships.<sup>1</sup> Born
in 1816, Charlotte was the daughter of an Irish clergyman, Patrick
Brontë.<sup>8</sup> The early death of her mother had a profound and
lasting effect, and nearly all her novels feature young women forced to
navigate a harsh world without the security of parental
love.<sup>8</sup> This personal tragedy became a cornerstone of her
literary vision.

The novel's most infamous locations and characters are drawn directly
from Brontë's life with startling accuracy:

- **Lowood Institution is Cowan Bridge School**: In 1824, Charlotte and
  her sisters were sent to the Clergy Daughters’ School at Cowan
  Bridge.<sup>1</sup> Her descriptions of Lowood in the novel—with its
  harsh discipline, terrible food, and freezing conditions—are a
  faithful, if bitter, depiction of her real-life
  experience.<sup>1</sup> The tragic deaths of her two elder sisters,
  Maria and Elizabeth, from illnesses contracted at the school are
  mirrored in the heartbreaking fate of Jane's saintly friend, Helen
  Burns.<sup>9</sup> The school's cruel, hypocritical headmaster,
  Reverend William Carus-Wilson, was immortalized as the villainous Mr.
  Brocklehurst.<sup>1</sup>

- **The Governess's Plight**: Brontë worked as a governess, a uniquely
  difficult position for a middle-class woman in Victorian England. A
  governess was neither a family member nor a servant, existing in a
  lonely and socially ambiguous space.<sup>12</sup> This firsthand
  experience of social invisibility and economic dependency fuels Jane's
  quest for respect and independence.<sup>8</sup>

- **A Forbidden Love in Brussels**: The passionate, intellectually
  charged, and ultimately doomed relationship between Jane and Mr.
  Rochester was heavily inspired by Charlotte's own intense and
  unrequited love for Constantin Heger, her married professor in
  Brussels.<sup>1</sup> Heger's powerful, eccentric personality and his
  recognition of Charlotte's talent are clearly reflected in the
  "middle-aged ruffian" hero who captivates Jane.<sup>1</sup>

#### Fact-Checking the Brontë Myth

A persistent legend surrounds the Brontës, painting them as three
lonely, isolated sisters on the windswept Yorkshire moors, whose genius
was a mysterious product of tragedy and deprivation.<sup>15</sup> This
myth, however, is a dramatic oversimplification that obscures the truth
of their creative lives.

- **Myth**: The Brontës were unworldly recluses, cut off from society.

- **Fact**: Haworth, their home, was a functioning provincial town, not
  a desolate wilderness.<sup>16</sup> The Brontë children were voracious
  readers with access to their father's extensive library and
  contemporary journals like  
  *Blackwood's Magazine*.<sup>9</sup> Their literary talents were not
  born in a vacuum but were meticulously honed over years of writing
  stories set in their complex, imaginary worlds of "Angria" and
  "Gondal".<sup>9</sup> In fact, characters and plot elements from  
  *Jane Eyre* were directly drawn from Charlotte's earlier Angrian
  tales.<sup>19</sup>

- **Myth**: Their alcoholic brother, Branwell, secretly wrote their
  masterpieces.

- **Fact**: This is a baseless and sexist theory that gained traction
  because many Victorians could not believe that unmarried women—let
  alone clergymen's daughters—could write with such passion, violence,
  and "coarseness".<sup>14</sup> There is no credible evidence to
  support this claim; it serves only to deny the creative agency of the
  sisters.<sup>15</sup>

The "Brontë Myth" was not an accident. It was, in part, a deliberate act
of reputation management. After *Jane Eyre* was condemned as rebellious
and immoral, Charlotte herself, in a biographical notice about her
sisters, framed their work as the product of innocence and isolation, a
strategic move to soften their radical image.<sup>15</sup> This
narrative was cemented by her friend Elizabeth Gaskell's famous 1857
biography, which downplayed Charlotte's worldly experiences and
emphasized the family's tragedies, recasting a defiant artist as a
suffering saint.<sup>16</sup> The myth, therefore, tells us as much
about Victorian anxieties surrounding female genius as it does about the
Brontës themselves.

#### Publication and Scandalous Success

To ensure her work would be judged on its merits and not dismissed as
"women's writing," Charlotte adopted the male pseudonym 'Currer
Bell'.<sup>1</sup> Her first novel,

*The Professor*, was rejected by multiple publishers.<sup>1</sup>
However, one publisher, Smith, Elder and Co., saw promise and asked if
she had another manuscript, preferably a three-volume novel with more
action.<sup>1</sup> She did. She sent them the nearly complete

*Jane Eyre*, which she had begun in August 1846 while caring for her
father during an eye operation.<sup>1</sup>

The publisher's response was electric. *Jane Eyre: An Autobiography* was
accepted and published with astonishing speed on October 16,
1847.<sup>1</sup> It was an immediate and massive commercial
success.<sup>1</sup> Queen Victoria herself read it, calling it a
"clever interesting book".<sup>21</sup>

The critical reception, however, was a firestorm. While some praised its
raw power, originality, and realism, many influential critics were
horrified.<sup>2</sup> The novel was attacked as "anti-Christian,"
immoral, and dangerously revolutionary.<sup>14</sup> The conservative
critic Elizabeth Rigby famously declared that the book was filled with
"the tone of mind and thought which has overthrown authority and
violated every code human and divine".<sup>5</sup> When the public
discovered that the author of this "coarse" and "vulgar" book was a
woman, the scandal only intensified.<sup>14</sup>

*Jane Eyre* was not just a bestseller; it was a cultural earthquake.

## Part II: A Journey Through Translation's Prism

### More Than Words: How ***Jane Eyre*** Conquered the Globe

Though born in the Yorkshire moors, *Jane Eyre* is a true citizen of the
world. It is a "world novel" that has been translated more than 600
times into at least 68 different languages, from Spanish and Chinese to
Persian and Tamil.<sup>24</sup> This global journey reveals that a
translation is never just a copy. Each new version is an act of cultural
re-interpretation, a prism that refracts the original story, releasing
new layers of meaning and reflecting the values of the society that
receives it.<sup>24</sup>

The novel's international spread began almost immediately, moving in
"concentric circles" from its English center.<sup>27</sup>

- **Germany (1848)**: One of the earliest translations appeared in
  German just a year after the original.<sup>28</sup> The novel's impact
  was immense, inspiring multiple new translations, abridgments, and a
  very popular stage adaptation,  
  *Die Waise von Lowood* (The Orphan of Lowood, 1853).<sup>29</sup> It
  even influenced a new subgenre of German romance novels, most famously
  those by the bestselling author Eugenie Marlitt, whose work was seen
  as a "lighter-tinted Jane Eyre".<sup>29</sup>

- **Russia (1849)**: The first Russian translation also arrived
  swiftly.<sup>32</sup> Early Russian translators were particularly
  drawn to the novel's Gothic elements, often intensifying the scenes of
  mystery and terror to appeal to a readership fascinated with the
  genre.<sup>33</sup> The translator Irinarkh Vvedensky was known to
  alter or remove passages where Jane protests against her social
  conditions, perhaps tailoring the heroine's rebellion to the specific
  political climate of Tsarist Russia.<sup>32</sup> The novel became a
  key text in Russian debates about the "woman question" and female
  subjectivity.<sup>35</sup>

- **France (1854)**: The first major French translation by Noëmi
  Lesbazeilles-Souvestre was highly influential, but it also subtly
  reshaped the heroine.<sup>37</sup> This version tended to soften
  Jane's fiery passion and anger, molding her into a character that
  conformed more closely to French ideals of respectable
  femininity.<sup>37</sup> This "tamed" French version would later
  become the source for the first Polish translation, passing its
  cultural alterations down the line.<sup>38</sup>

- **Spain (1850s-1880s)**: The novel's entry into the Spanish-speaking
  world was indirect and fragmented. It first appeared in the 1850s in
  Cuba and Chile, not as a direct translation from English, but as a
  retranslation of a condensed French version.<sup>37</sup> It wasn't
  until 1882 that a version was serialized in a Madrid newspaper, and
  even this was a retranslation from a different French
  text.<sup>37</sup> A full, book-length translation did not appear in
  Spain for 81 years after the original publication, showing a much
  slower cultural absorption compared to other European
  nations.<sup>40</sup>

- **Japan (1896)**: The initial Japanese reception during the Meiji
  period was a notable failure. The first serialized translation was so
  poorly received that it was canceled after just fourteen
  chapters.<sup>41</sup> The Japanese reading public at the time was not
  ready for a heroine as fiercely independent and defiant as Jane; her
  character was simply too alien to the era's conventional expectations
  for women.<sup>42</sup> It would take another three decades before a
  full translation found a sympathetic audience in the
  1930s.<sup>42</sup>

- **China (1925-Present)**: The novel's journey in China charts the
  country's dramatic 20th-century history. The first translation in 1925
  was a heavily abridged version that presented the story as a simple
  romance.<sup>43</sup> The first complete translation in 1936 by Li
  Jiye gave the novel its iconic Chinese title:  
  **简爱 (Jiǎn Ài)**.<sup>43</sup> This title is a brilliant act of
  cultural translation; while phonetically resembling "Jane Eyre," its
  characters semantically mean "Simple Love," a framing that made the
  novel immediately accessible and appealing.<sup>43</sup> The book was
  later banned during the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) for its "petty
  bourgeois" focus on individual love rather than revolutionary
  struggle.<sup>43</sup> However, following the country's opening up in
  the 1980s,  
  *Jane Eyre* experienced a massive revival and is now a beloved classic
  and a required text in the national curriculum.<sup>43</sup>

#### Table 1: Timeline of Key International Translations and First Impressions

| Year | Language | Title (if different) | Translator(s) | Key Characteristics & Initial Reception |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| 1848 | German | *Johanna Eyre* | Multiple early translators | Immediate impact; spawned stage adaptations and influenced German romance genre.<sup>27</sup> |
| 1849 | Russian | *Дженни Эйр* | Irinarkh Vvedensky | Emphasized Gothic elements; altered Jane's rebellious speeches; central to "woman question" debates.<sup>27</sup> |
| 1854 | French | *Jane Eyre, ou les Mémoires d'une Institutrice* | Noëmi Lesbazeilles-Souvestre | Softened Jane's passion to fit French feminine ideals; became source for other translations.<sup>37</sup> |
| 1880 | Polish | *Janina* | Emilia Dobrzańska | Abridged and domesticated; relayed from the 1854 French translation, not the English original.<sup>27</sup> |
| 1882 | Spanish | *Juana Eyre, ó memorias de una institutriz* | Anonymous | Serialized in Madrid; relayed from a French translation; full book version delayed for decades.<sup>37</sup> |
| 1896 | Japanese | (Title unclear) | Futo Mizutani | Abridged and serialized; cancelled after four installments due to cultural disconnect with the heroine's independence.<sup>41</sup> |
| 1904 | Italian | *Jane Eyre* | Multiple early translators | Arrived relatively late compared to other major European languages.<sup>27</sup> |
| 1936 | Chinese | *简爱 (Jiǎn Ài)* | Li Jiye | First complete translation; title means "Simple Love," framing it as a romance; later banned, then revived as a classic.<sup>43</sup> |
| 1946 | Hebrew | (Title unclear) | Multiple translators | Late arrival, possibly because Jewish readers in Europe had access to English, German, or Russian versions.<sup>27</sup> |
| 1985 | Arabic | (Title unclear) | Munir Baalbaki | Very late arrival into the Arabic-speaking world compared to many other global languages.<sup>25</sup> |
| 2010 | Tajik | (Title unclear) | Commissioned | First-ever translation, supported by the British Embassy as a form of cultural diplomacy.<sup>27</sup> |

### Special Focus: The "Strange Fate" of ***Jane Eyre*** in Poland (Dziwne losy Jane Eyre w Polsce)

The story of *Jane Eyre* in Poland is a fascinating case study in how
literature crosses borders, especially under challenging historical
circumstances. The novel's journey into Polish culture was shaped by the
political realities of the 19th century, the dominance of other European
languages, and a unique national context that gave its themes of
independence a powerful new resonance.

#### The First Encounter: ***Janina*** (1880)

*Jane Eyre* first appeared in Polish 34 years after its English
publication, serialized in the weekly magazine "Tydzień" between 1880
and 1881.<sup>38</sup> The translation immediately signaled its adaptive
approach with its title,

*Janina*.<sup>38</sup> By changing the foreign-sounding "Jane" to the
familiar Polish name "Janina," the translator, Emilia Dobrzańska, was
domesticating the story, making it feel more local and accessible to her
audience.<sup>47</sup> Dobrzańska was a notable educational activist and
a prolific translator, though she worked primarily from French, a fact
that would prove crucial.<sup>48</sup>

#### The Relayed Translation Controversy

A significant discovery in Polish literary scholarship is that *Janina*,
despite its subtitle "A novel from English," was almost certainly not
translated from Charlotte Brontë's original text.<sup>38</sup> It was a
"relayed translation," meaning it was translated from another
translation. The source was the 1854 French version by Noëmi
Lesbazeilles-Souvestre.<sup>38</sup>

The evidence for this is compelling. The Polish text is filled with
French phrases and grammatical structures (calques) that are not in the
English original.<sup>38</sup> Furthermore,

*Janina* reproduces specific errors and alterations found only in the
French version, such as subtly softening Jane's fiery character to
better fit 19th-century conventions of femininity.<sup>38</sup> This
practice was not unusual. During the Partitions of Poland, when the
country was divided and occupied by Russia, Prussia, and Austria, French
served as a major cultural and linguistic gateway to the rest of Europe,
and many foreign works entered Polish via French
intermediaries.<sup>38</sup>

#### Educational and Cultural Footprint

While it is unclear if *Jane Eyre* has ever been a mandatory text
(*lektura obowiązkowa*) on the national curriculum or appeared on the
final high school *matura* exam, it is firmly established as a literary
classic in Poland.<sup>49</sup> Its educational significance is
recognized by international projects like the "Prismatic Jane Eyre
Schools Project," which developed specific teaching resources for
Polish-speaking students, using translation as a tool for creative
engagement with the novel.<sup>51</sup>

Polish literary criticism has traced the history of the five distinct
Polish translations of the novel, noting how each version is a product
of its time.<sup>54</sup> The first translation,

*Janina*, used domestication, while later 20th-century translations,
like the one by Teresa Świderska which gave the novel its standard
Polish title *Dziwne losy Jane Eyre* (The Strange Fate of Jane Eyre),
favored foreignization, preserving the Englishness of the
original.<sup>47</sup> The novel is often held up as a benchmark for
social commentary in literature. The influential cultural institution
Culture.pl compares its deep exploration of society to that of one of
Poland's greatest national novels,

*Lalka* (*The Doll*) by Bolesław Prus.<sup>56</sup>

#### Polish Adaptations and Modern Reception

There is no record of a major Polish film or television adaptation of
*Jane Eyre*. However, a Polish radio play adaptation titled *Dziwna
miłość Jane Eyre* (The Strange Love of Jane Eyre) was produced, directed
by Juliusz Owidzki and starring Zofia Kucówna as Jane and Krzysztof
Chamiec as Rochester.<sup>57</sup>

Today, the novel enjoys a strong following among Polish readers. On
popular book community websites like Lubimyczytać.pl and in reviews on
retail sites like Empik, *Dziwne losy Jane Eyre* consistently receives
high ratings.<sup>58</sup> Polish readers praise the timeless story of a
strong, independent woman, her complex inner life, and the novel's
powerful romantic core.<sup>50</sup> Some contemporary readers find the
Victorian language overly ornate or "flowery," but the book's status as
a masterpiece of world literature is undisputed.<sup>58</sup> In Poland,
as in many countries, it is often marketed and celebrated as one of
history's first feminist novels.<sup>62</sup>

#### A Unique Polish Perspective: Reading for Independence in a Nation Without It

To fully understand why *Jane Eyre* resonates in Poland, one must
consider the historical context of its arrival. The first translation
appeared in 1880, a time when Poland did not exist as an independent
country. For over a century, its territory was occupied by foreign
empires that actively sought to suppress Polish culture and national
identity.

In this context, the novel's central theme—the relentless struggle of an
individual for autonomy, dignity, and freedom against oppressive
forces—takes on a powerful allegorical dimension. Jane's fight against
the tyranny of the Reed family, the institutional cruelty of Lowood, and
the patriarchal dominance of Rochester and St. John is, at its heart, a
fight for self-sovereignty. Her famous cry, "I am no bird; and no net
ensnares me: I am a free human being with an independent will," is a
declaration of personal independence that could be read by 19th-century
Poles as a profound metaphor for the national struggle for
freedom.<sup>4</sup> For a nation fighting to preserve its identity
while under occupation, the story of a powerless orphan who achieves
freedom through sheer force of will and moral integrity would have
offered a deeply resonant and inspiring narrative. The "strange fate" of
Jane Eyre in Poland is therefore not just literary; it is intertwined
with the strange and difficult fate of the nation itself.

## Part III: Deconstructing the Story

### Reading Between the Lines: Symbols, Secrets, and Hidden Meanings

*Jane Eyre* is a novel rich with symbolism, where objects, settings, and
even characters carry layers of hidden meaning. Charlotte Brontë uses
these symbols to map Jane's internal journey and to explore the novel's
central conflicts between passion and reason, freedom and confinement.

#### The Red-Room: A Prison of Passion and Trauma

The red-room at Gateshead is the novel's foundational symbol of
oppression.<sup>63</sup> It is here, after retaliating against her
cousin John, that the young Jane is physically and psychologically
imprisoned.<sup>64</sup> The room, with its deep red colors and
connection to death (her uncle died there), represents the suffocating
and terrifying power of the adult world over the powerless
child.<sup>65</sup> Jane's panic and belief that she sees a ghost in the
room is a manifestation of her trauma.<sup>65</sup> However, her furious
outburst against Mrs. Reed upon her release is her first great act of
rebellion, a moment where she discovers a "strangest sense of freedom,
of triumph".<sup>64</sup> The memory of the red-room haunts Jane
throughout her life, resurfacing at moments of intense emotional
distress, forever linking her struggle for freedom to this initial
trauma of unjust confinement.<sup>63</sup>

#### Fire and Ice: The Novel's Central Duality

The recurring motifs of fire and ice represent the core conflict of the
novel: the battle between passionate vitality and cold, repressive
forces.<sup>63</sup>

- **Fire** symbolizes passion, anger, and spirit. Jane's inner self is
  repeatedly associated with fire; she describes her own mind as "a
  ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing, devouring".<sup>63</sup> Her
  connection with Rochester, a fellow fiery spirit, is marked by his
  "flaming and flashing" eyes.<sup>66</sup> However, fire is also a
  destructive force. The mysterious fires at Thornfield, set by Bertha
  Mason, represent the catastrophic consequences of passion that has
  been violently repressed and left to fester.<sup>65</sup>

- **Ice** symbolizes emotional desolation, loneliness, and death. The
  "death-white realms" of the Arctic in Jane's childhood book mirror her
  spiritual isolation at Gateshead.<sup>66</sup> This symbolism finds
  its ultimate human form in St. John Rivers. He is described in terms
  of ice, marble, and coldness, representing a life of rigid,
  passionless duty that threatens to freeze Jane's soul and extinguish
  her inner fire.<sup>69</sup> Jane's choice to flee his icy proposal
  for Rochester's warmth is a choice for a life that embraces both
  spirit and passion.

#### The Split Chestnut Tree: An Omen of a Broken Union

The great chestnut tree in Thornfield's orchard stands as a powerful
omen.<sup>68</sup> It is under its boughs that Rochester makes his
passionate marriage proposal to Jane.<sup>63</sup> That very night, a
violent storm splits the tree in two with a bolt of lightning—a clear
and ominous symbol that their union is doomed.<sup>63</sup> The event
foreshadows the shocking revelation at the altar and the violent
separation that follows. The symbol's power is confirmed at the end of
the novel, when the maimed Rochester explicitly compares himself to the
"old lightning-struck chestnut-tree," acknowledging that their
relationship has been shattered and must be rebuilt on new, different
terms.<sup>63</sup>

#### Bertha Mason: The Madwoman, the Double, the Other

Bertha Mason, the infamous "madwoman in the attic," is far more than
just a plot device. She is the novel's most complex and debated symbol,
a figure who embodies the darkest secrets of the Victorian
era.<sup>63</sup>

- **As a Symbol of the Trapped Victorian Wife**: Bertha can be read as a
  terrifying allegory for the fate of women in a patriarchal society.
  Stripped of her freedom, her wealth, and her identity, and locked away
  from the world, she represents the Victorian woman denied any outlet
  for her intellect or passion, a repression so extreme it drives her to
  madness.<sup>63</sup>

- **As Jane's "Double"**: Critically, Bertha functions as Jane's
  alter-ego, the physical manifestation of the rage and passion that
  Jane, as a respectable governess, is forced to suppress.<sup>63</sup>
  When Jane feels trapped by her impending marriage, it is Bertha who
  appears in her room and symbolically destroys the wedding veil—an act
  of rebellion Jane could only dream of.<sup>63</sup> When Thornfield
  Hall becomes a symbol of Jane's potential submission and loss of self,
  it is Bertha who burns it to the ground.<sup>63</sup> Bertha is the
  untamed, furious expression of Jane's own inner fire.

- **As the Colonial "Other"**: From a postcolonial perspective, Bertha's
  identity as a Creole woman from the West Indies is
  crucial.<sup>10</sup> Her depiction in dehumanizing, animalistic terms
  reflects the racist ideologies of 19th-century British imperialism,
  which often characterized colonial subjects as savage and
  subhuman.<sup>10</sup> Her confinement in the attic of an English
  manor symbolizes the violent repression and "locking away" of the
  foreign cultures that the British Empire was exploiting.<sup>63</sup>

The novel’s symbols do not exist in isolation; they are part of an
intricate, interconnected system. The **Red-Room**, with its fiery
color, is where Jane's own passionate **fire** is first ignited in
rebellion. This inner fire links her directly to **Bertha**, her
passionate and destructive "double." Bertha's literal act of arson is
the ultimate, catastrophic expression of this symbolic fire. This
destruction was foreshadowed by the lightning—a fire from the sky—that
struck the **chestnut tree**. This network of symbols creates a
sophisticated structure that reinforces the novel's central theme:
passion as a dual force, capable of providing inner strength when
channeled (as in Jane) but becoming a force of utter destruction when
violently repressed (as with Bertha).

### "Reader, I Married Him": Re-examining the Story's Controversies

*Jane Eyre* was revolutionary for its time, but over 175 years, our
understanding of issues like gender, race, and mental health has evolved
dramatically. As a result, the novel today is both celebrated as a
trailblazing classic and critically examined for its more problematic
elements. It is a text that forces us to confront the complexities of
its legacy.

#### A Foundational Feminist Text?

There is a strong consensus that *Jane Eyre* is one of the first and
most important feminist novels in English literature.<sup>62</sup> It
was groundbreaking for placing the rich inner life—the moral and
spiritual development—of a woman at the center of the
narrative.<sup>7</sup> Jane's unwavering demand for respect and autonomy
was a radical departure from the passive heroines of earlier fiction.

Her declaration to Rochester during his proposal is one of the most
powerful feminist statements in literature: "I am not talking to you now
through the medium of custom, conventionalities, nor even of mortal
flesh: it is my spirit that addresses your spirit; just as if both had
passed through the grave, and we stood at God's feet, equal—as we
are!".<sup>4</sup> This is a breathtaking claim of spiritual equality
that transcends the rigid class and gender hierarchies of her time. Her
subsequent actions—fleeing Thornfield rather than becoming a mistress
and later rejecting St. John's passionless proposal—are powerful
assertions of her independence and self-worth.<sup>6</sup>

However, modern feminist critics also point to the novel's
limitations.<sup>76</sup> While Jane achieves a marriage of equals, her
ultimate happiness is still defined through marriage and her role as a
wife and mother. Some argue that the ending, in which she returns to
nurse a maimed and dependent Rochester, suggests that equality between
the sexes is only possible when the man is physically weakened and
stripped of his power.<sup>76</sup> In this reading, Jane's final role
as a caregiver can be seen as a retreat into a more traditional form of
femininity, undercutting the novel's more radical claims.<sup>78</sup>

#### Postcolonial and Racial Critiques

The novel's most significant controversy for modern readers lies in its
treatment of Bertha Mason. Postcolonial criticism has powerfully exposed
the racist and imperialist ideologies underpinning her
characterization.<sup>10</sup> As a "Creole" (a term for a person of
European descent born in the West Indies), Bertha is depicted not merely
as mad, but as racially and morally degenerate.<sup>10</sup> She is
described in dehumanizing, animalistic terms—as a "vampire," a "hyena,"
something that "grovelled...on all fours".<sup>68</sup> This portrayal
taps directly into the racist stereotypes used to justify British
colonial rule, framing the colonial subject as savage and
subhuman.<sup>73</sup>

Furthermore, the source of Jane's liberation is itself tied to the
colonial system. The inheritance that makes her financially independent,
allowing her to return to Rochester as an equal, comes from her uncle in
Madeira, an island whose economy was deeply enmeshed in the Atlantic
trade networks built on colonial exploitation.<sup>13</sup> In this
light, Jane's personal triumph is funded by the same imperial system
that oppresses and ultimately destroys Bertha.

#### LGBTQ+ and Queer Readings

Queer theory offers ways to read the novel that look beyond its central
heterosexual romance. The influential feminist critic Adrienne Rich
argued that the true emotional core of the novel is not Jane's
relationship with Rochester, but her journey of being nurtured and
educated by a series of powerful female figures.<sup>81</sup>

Building on this, scholars have analyzed Jane's intense and deeply
emotional relationships with other women as homoerotic.<sup>82</sup> Her
bond with her childhood friend Helen Burns and her deep devotion to her
teacher, Miss Temple, are described with a passion that transcends
simple friendship. While such "romantic friendships" were common in the
Victorian era, Jane's profound despair after Miss Temple marries and
leaves Lowood—"she had taken with her the serene atmosphere I had been
breathing" <sup>82</sup>—suggests a bond of primary importance. Some
interpretations even posit Jane as bisexual, arguing that her marriage
to Rochester only becomes possible after he is blinded and maimed,
transforming him into a more dependent, "effeminate" figure and creating
a relationship dynamic that mirrors the egalitarianism she found in her
female friendships.<sup>82</sup>

#### Disability and Mental Health

*Jane Eyre* is a crucial text for disability studies, reflecting
19th-century attitudes toward physical and mental difference. Bertha's
"madness" is portrayed through the lens of Victorian fears, where mental
illness was often conflated with monstrousness, animalism, and dangerous
female sexuality.<sup>79</sup> Modern medical analysis has suggested her
symptoms could be consistent with a neurological condition like
Huntington disease.<sup>85</sup>

Rochester's blinding and the loss of his hand at the end of the novel
are often read as a symbolic castration, a physical punishment that
purges him of his patriarchal arrogance and renders him "tame" enough
for Jane to marry as an equal.<sup>86</sup> More recent scholarship has
also explored Jane herself through the lens of disability, suggesting
her social awkwardness and intense inner world align with hallmarks of
autism.<sup>79</sup> In this view, her quiet but firm control of the
narrative becomes a way of empowering her neurodivergence against a
world that misunderstands her.<sup>79</sup> While Brontë uses the tropes
of her time, her depiction of Jane's compassion toward her mentally
failing Aunt Reed is seen as an early call for more humane treatment of
the mentally ill.<sup>80</sup>

The novel's modern legacy is that of a "problematic favorite." It is a
book that can be simultaneously celebrated for its groundbreaking
feminism and criticized for its colonialist and ableist blind spots. As
one TikTok user aptly commented, "Literally my favorite book and every
criticism of it is 110% valid".<sup>87</sup> This inherent contradiction
is what makes it such a vital and enduring text. It challenges readers
to think critically, to appreciate a work for its historical context
while also holding it accountable to modern ethical standards. It is a
book that demands discussion, debate, and re-interpretation with every
new generation.

## Part IV: ***Jane Eyre*** in the 21st Century

### From Page to Screen and Beyond: A Universe of Adaptations

The dramatic power of *Jane Eyre*—with its passionate romance, Gothic
suspense, and compelling heroine—has made it one of the most frequently
adapted novels in history.<sup>88</sup> Since the first stage play
appeared in 1849, just two years after the book's publication, the story
has been retold countless times in film, television, theatre, and
beyond, with each version reflecting the cultural and artistic
sensibilities of its era.<sup>90</sup>

#### Landmark Film & TV Versions

While dozens of adaptations exist, a few have become particularly
influential in shaping the public's imagination of the story:

- **The 1943 Hollywood Classic**: Directed by Robert Stevenson, this
  version is defined by its moody, Gothic atmosphere and the towering
  performances of its stars, Orson Welles as a tormented Rochester and
  Joan Fontaine as a delicate Jane.<sup>91</sup> To fit a cinematic
  runtime, it heavily abridges the novel, completely excising Jane's
  time with the Rivers family.<sup>94</sup> It remains an iconic but
  unfaithful adaptation, more a classic Hollywood melodrama than a true
  reflection of the book.<sup>93</sup>

- **The 1983 BBC Miniseries**: Starring Timothy Dalton and Zelah Clarke,
  this 11-part series is beloved by many fans for its remarkable
  fidelity to the source material.<sup>96</sup> Its slower pace allows
  it to include much of Brontë's original dialogue and nearly all the
  novel's plot points, making it a benchmark for faithful
  adaptations.<sup>96</sup>

- **The 2006 BBC Miniseries**: A fan-favorite, this four-part series
  starring Toby Stephens and Ruth Wilson was praised for its modern
  pacing and the intense, palpable chemistry between its
  leads.<sup>97</sup> While it takes some liberties with the plot, it
  captures the passionate heart of the novel and brought the story to a
  new generation.<sup>97</sup> The series received numerous accolades,
  including BAFTA awards and a Golden Globe nomination for Ruth
  Wilson.<sup>97</sup>

- **The 2011 Film**: Directed by Cary Fukunaga and starring Michael
  Fassbender and Mia Wasikowska, this adaptation was critically
  acclaimed for its artistic and innovative approach.<sup>100</sup> It
  broke from tradition by using a non-chronological, flashback-driven
  narrative structure and emphasized the novel's dark, Gothic elements
  through stunning, atmospheric cinematography.<sup>96</sup> It is
  widely regarded as one of the most artistically successful cinematic
  interpretations of the novel.<sup>101</sup>

#### Table 2: Landmark Adaptations of ***Jane Eyre*** Across Media

| Year | Title/Medium | Key Cast/Creators | Defining Feature/Critical Reception | Country of Origin |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| 1943 | *Jane Eyre* (Film) | Orson Welles, Joan Fontaine | Iconic Hollywood version with a heavy Gothic atmosphere; unfaithful to the plot but cinematically powerful.<sup>92</sup> | USA |
| 1966 | *Wide Sargasso Sea* (Novel) | Jean Rhys (Author) | A postcolonial prequel giving a voice and backstory to Bertha Mason; now a classic in its own right.<sup>91</sup> | UK |
| 1983 | *Jane Eyre* (BBC Series) | Timothy Dalton, Zelah Clarke | Highly faithful to the novel's plot and dialogue; considered a benchmark for purists.<sup>96</sup> | UK |
| N/A | *Dziwna miłość Jane Eyre* (Radio Play) | Juliusz Owidzki (Dir.) | A notable Polish audio adaptation, showing the novel's reach into non-visual media in Poland.<sup>57</sup> | Poland |
| 2006 | *Jane Eyre* (BBC Series) | Toby Stephens, Ruth Wilson | Critically acclaimed for its passionate chemistry and modern sensibility; a fan favorite.<sup>97</sup> | UK |
| 2011 | *Jane Eyre* (Film) | Michael Fassbender, Mia Wasikowska | Artistically innovative with a non-linear structure and strong emphasis on Gothic atmosphere.<sup>96</sup> | UK |
| 2016 | *Manga Classics: Jane Eyre* (Graphic Novel) | Crystal S. Chan, Sunneko Lee | Makes the classic accessible to manga readers; praised for its art but noted for making characters more conventionally attractive.<sup>104</sup> | USA/Canada |

#### Beyond the Original: A Universe of Retellings

The influence of *Jane Eyre* extends far beyond direct adaptations. The
story has become a cultural touchstone, inspiring a vast ecosystem of
creative works that re-imagine, critique, and expand upon the original.

- **Literary Re-imaginings**: The most significant of these is Jean
  Rhys's 1966 masterpiece, *Wide Sargasso Sea*, which serves as a
  prequel telling Bertha Mason's tragic story from her own perspective
  in the Caribbean.<sup>91</sup> This postcolonial response
  fundamentally changed how readers and critics understood Bertha's
  character. Countless other novels have retold the story from the
  perspective of other characters like Adèle, or have transported the
  plot to modern settings, from science fiction worlds to the American
  rock music scene.<sup>91</sup>

- **Visual Narratives**: The novel has been successfully adapted into
  manga and graphic novels, formats praised for making the dense
  Victorian text engaging for a new generation of readers.<sup>104</sup>
  These versions often use the visual medium to highlight the story's
  emotional intensity, though they sometimes soften the novel's harsher
  elements by making characters like Jane and Rochester more
  conventionally attractive than Brontë described.<sup>104</sup>
  Minimalist and modern retellings also appear in webtoon
  formats.<sup>105</sup>

- **Fanfiction and Fan Communities**: *Jane Eyre* has a passionate and
  active fanfiction community on platforms like Archive of Our Own
  (AO3), Wattpad, and FanFiction.net.<sup>107</sup> In these spaces,
  fans become creators, writing stories that explore alternate endings
  (what if Jane stayed?), modern alternate universes (AU), and different
  character pairings. This vibrant fan culture demonstrates a deep,
  ongoing, and creative engagement with the characters and themes Brontë
  created, keeping the story alive in a dynamic, participatory
  way.<sup>110</sup>

### From Classic Novel to TikTok Trend: Why ***Jane Eyre*** Still Hits Different

In the 21st century, *Jane Eyre* has found a new and vibrant life
online, proving its enduring appeal to a generation of digital natives.
Far from being a dusty classic confined to the classroom, the novel is
an active part of modern internet culture, particularly among young
people.

#### The Digital Afterlife

- **TikTok and the "Dark Academia" Aesthetic**: *Jane Eyre* is a
  foundational text for the popular online aesthetic known as "dark
  academia".<sup>113</sup> This subculture romanticizes classic
  literature, Gothic architecture, intellectualism, and a moody,
  scholarly atmosphere. On TikTok and Instagram, the hashtag \#janeeyre
  is filled with aesthetic video montages featuring windswept moors, old
  books, and candlelit rooms, all set to dramatic classical
  music.<sup>113</sup> Users share videos of their annotated copies,
  turning the act of reading into a public, creative
  performance.<sup>113</sup>

- **Memes and Viral Moments**: The novel's most famous lines and moments
  have become internet memes. Jane's iconic closing line, "Reader, I
  married him," is often used humorously or ironically on social media
  to comment on questionable relationship choices.<sup>87</sup> The
  novel's many "red flags"—particularly Rochester's manipulative
  behavior and the whole wife-in-the-attic situation—are a frequent
  source of comedic critique. One viral TikTok from the study guide
  company SparkNotes perfectly captured this modern ambivalence,
  reacting to "Reader, I married him" with a horrified "girl
  NO".<sup>87</sup> At the same time, Jane's passionate speeches are
  performed in dramatic readings by creators, often going viral and
  introducing the power of Brontë's prose to a new
  audience.<sup>116</sup>

#### Relatable Themes for Gen Z

Despite being written in a vastly different era, the core themes of
*Jane Eyre* resonate powerfully with the concerns of today's youth.

- **Finding Your Voice**: At its heart, the novel is about a young
  woman's struggle to be heard and respected in a world that tries to
  silence her. Jane's journey from a powerless child to a woman who
  speaks her truth with unwavering conviction connects deeply with a
  generation focused on social justice, activism, and authentic
  self-expression.

- **Mental Health and Trauma**: The novel's sensitive portrayal of
  Jane's childhood trauma, her feelings of isolation and depression, and
  her ultimate resilience speaks to modern conversations about mental
  health and well-being. Jane's story is a powerful depiction of
  surviving and healing from profound psychological wounds.

- **Authenticity and Self-Respect**: Jane's central dilemma—choosing
  between her love for Rochester and her own integrity—is a timeless
  conflict. Her refusal to compromise her self-worth, even at the cost
  of immense heartbreak, is a powerful message for young people
  navigating the complexities of relationships and establishing their
  own values. Her declaration, "I care for myself. The more solitary,
  the more friendless, the more unsustained I am, the more I will
  respect myself," remains a radical statement of
  self-possession.<sup>77</sup>

### Conclusion: An Enduring, Evolving Legacy

The journey of *Jane Eyre* from a scandalous Victorian novel to a
21st-century TikTok trend is a testament to its extraordinary power. Its
endurance stems from a unique combination of timeless emotional
appeal—the gripping romance, the Gothic mystery—and its complex,
challenging, and often "problematic" nature. It is not a simple story
with easy answers. It forces every new generation to grapple with its
contradictions: it is a feminist text that ends in a conventional
marriage; a critique of the class system written by a woman with her own
prejudices; a story of profound empathy that contains deeply troubling
depictions of race and disability.

Historically, the act of reading was a private, intimate dialogue
between the author and the "Reader." Today, that relationship has been
transformed. Digital platforms have turned engagement with literature
into a public, creative, and communal performance. Young readers now
interpret *Jane Eyre* not just in their own minds, but through shared
aesthetic videos, humorous memes, and dramatic online readings. This
shift ensures that the novel is not a static relic but a living text,
constantly being re-read, re-mixed, and re-imagined in the global
cultural conversation. It continues to challenge, provoke, and inspire,
securing its legacy as a story that will be debated and beloved for
generations to come.

## Bibliography

### A. Primary Sources

1.  Brontë, Charlotte. *Jane Eyre*. 1st ed., Smith, Elder, and
    Co., 1847. <sup>3</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

2.  Brontë, Charlotte. *Jane Eyre; ou Les mémoires d'une institutrice*.
    Translated by Noëmi Lesbazeilles-Souvestre, 1854. <sup>38</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

3.  Brontë, Charlotte. *Janina*. Translated by Emilia Dobrzańska,
    serialized in "Tydzień," 1880-1881. <sup>38</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

4.  Brontë, Charlotte. *简爱 (Jiǎn Ài)*. Translated by Li Jiye, 1936.
    <sup>43</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

5.  Rhys, Jean. *Wide Sargasso Sea*. Andre Deutsch, 1966. <sup>91</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

### B. Secondary Sources

#### Polish Sources

6.  "Charlotte Brontë - 'Dziwne losy Jane Eyre'." *Pisarze Polscy*,
    2022,
    pisarzepolscy.pl/wiadomosci/pokaz/215,charlotte-bronte-dziwne-losy-jane-eyre.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>60</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

7.  "Charlotte Brontë i 'Dziwne losy Jane Eyre'." *Polskie Radio 24*, 31
    Mar. 2025,
    polskieradio24.pl/artykul/2719002,charlotte-bronte-i-dziwne-losy-jane-eyre.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>118</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

8.  "Cytaty z książki 'Dziwne Losy Jane Eyre'." *Lubimyczytać.pl*,
    lubimyczytac.pl/cytaty/5191463/ksiazka/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>119</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

9.  "Cytaty z książki 'Dziwne Losy Jane Eyre'." *NaKanapie.pl*,
    nakanapie.pl/ksiazka/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-888224/cytaty.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>120</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

10. "Dziwna miłość Jane Eyre." *E-teatr.pl*,
    e-teatr.pl/pl/realizacje/65527,szczegoly.html. Accessed 2025.
    <sup>57</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

11. "Dziwne losy Jane Eyre." *Empik.com*,
    [<u>www.empik.com/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-bronte-charlotte,p1257212806,ksiazka-p</u>](https://www.empik.com/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-bronte-charlotte,p1257212806,ksiazka-p).
    Accessed 2025. <sup>59</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

12. "Dziwne losy Jane Eyre." *Kultowy.pl*,
    kultowy.pl/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre. Accessed 2025. <sup>62</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

13. "Dziwne losy Jane Eyre." *Wydawnictwo Świat Książki*,
    wydawnictwoswiatksiazki.pl/tytul/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-9788381398916/.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>121</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

14. Hadyna, Dagmara. "A Relayed Translation. Looking for the Source Text
    of the First Polish Translation of Charlotte Brontë's Jane Eyre."
    *Studia Litteraria Universitatis Iagellonicae Cracoviensis*, vol.
    11, no. 2, 2016, pp. 73-81.<sup>38</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

15. "In Search of English Counterparts for 6 Classic Polish Novels."
    *Culture.pl*, 2018,
    culture.pl/en/article/in-search-of-english-counterparts-for-6-classic-polish-novels.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>56</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

16. "Opinie o 'Dziwne losy Jane Eyre'." *Lubimyczytać.pl*,
    lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5191463/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>58</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

17. Roszkowska, Monika. "The Evolution of Translation Standards as
    Illustrated by the History of Polish Translations of Jane Eyre by
    Charlotte Brontë." *Crossroads. A Journal of English Studies*, no.
    2, 2013, pp. 43-57.<sup>47</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

18. Różalska, Katarzyna. "My Pale Rusalka, a True Heathen: Reading
    Polish Jane Eyre across Centuries." *University of Manchester*,
    2021.<sup>54</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

19. "Ten spektakl trzeba zobaczyć." *Teatr Polonia*, 2024,
    www.teatrpolonia.pl/pr/826583/ten-spektakl-trzeba-zobaczyc.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>122</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

#### Academic Sources (Books, Journal Articles, Dissertations)

20. Beaty, Jerome. *Misreading Jane Eyre: A Postformalist Paradigm*.
    Ohio State University Press, 1996.<sup>123</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

21. Berg, Maggie. *Jane Eyre: Portrait of a Life*. Twayne Publishers,
    1987.<sup>124</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

22. Bhawar, Kanchan. "A Feminist Interpretation of the Novel Jane Eyre
    by Author Charlotte Brontë." *International Journal of Social
    Science and Human Research*, vol. 7, no. 12, 2024.<sup>72</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

23. Bodenheimer, Rosemarie. "Jane Eyre in Search of Her Story." *Papers
    on Language & Literature*, vol. 16, no. 4, 1980, pp.
    387-402.<sup>124</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

24. Bolt, David. *The Madwoman in the Classroom: Feminist Disability
    Studies*. Routledge, 2014.<sup>86</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

25. Brennan, Zoe. *Brontë's Jane Eyre*. Palgrave Macmillan,
    2010.<sup>14</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

26. Donaldson, Elizabeth J. "The Corpus of the Madwoman: Toward a
    Feminist Disability Studies Theory of Embodiment and Mental
    Illness." *NWSA Journal*, vol. 14, no. 3, 2002, pp.
    99-119.<sup>74</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

27. Eagleton, Terry. *Myths of Power: A Marxist Study of the Brontës*.
    Palgrave Macmillan, 1975.<sup>14</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

28. Engle, John. "A Bold New Timeless Classic: Fukunaga's Partial
    Reading of Jane Eyre." *Babel*, no. 3, 2012.<sup>100</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

29. Gilbert, Sandra M., and Susan Gubar. *The Madwoman in the Attic: The
    Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-Century Literary Imagination*. Yale
    University Press, 1979.<sup>72</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

30. Griesinger, Emily. "Charlotte Brontë's Religion: Faith, Feminism,
    and Jane Eyre." *Christianity and Literature*, vol. 58, no. 1, 2008,
    pp. 29-59.<sup>127</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

31. Hasty, Sayler McLean. "The Love That Dares to Speak Its Name: Queer
    Language and Female Homoeroticism in Oroonoko, Jane Eyre, and Aurora
    Leigh." Master's Thesis, University of Georgia, 2014. <sup>83</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

32. Hoeveler, Diane Long, and Lisa Jadwin. "Chronology." *Charlotte
    Brontë*, Twayne Publishers, 1988. <sup>11</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

33. Hughes, Sarah. "The Humanization of the Mentally Ill in *Jane
    Eyre*." *University of New Mexico*, 2022. <sup>80</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

34. Joshua, Essaka. *The Romantics and the May Day Tradition*.
    Routledge, 2016.<sup>86</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

35. Kuppers, Petra. *Disability and Contemporary Performance: Bodies on
    Edge*. Routledge, 2003.<sup>79</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

36. Marcus, Sharon. *Between Women: Friendship, Desire, and Marriage in
    Victorian England*. Princeton University Press, 2007.<sup>82</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

37. Miller, Lucasta. *The Brontë Myth*. Knopf, 2004.<sup>15</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

38. Morgan, Speer. "The Bronte Myth (review)." *The Missouri Review*,
    vol. 27, no. 2, 2004, pp. 181-182.<sup>16</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

39. Nygren, Alexandra. "The Disabled Female Colonial Subject in Jane
    Eyre." *Explicator*, vol. 74, no. 2, 2016, pp. 116-119.<sup>74</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

40. Ortega Sáez, Marta. "Juana Eyre en El Globo (1882-1883): la primera
    traducción de Jane Eyre en la España peninsular." *Brontë Studies*,
    vol. 48, no. 1, 2023, pp. 1-15.<sup>37</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

41. Reynolds, Matthew, et al. *Prismatic Jane Eyre: Close-Reading a
    World Novel Across Languages*. Open Book Publishers,
    2022.<sup>24</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

42. Rich, Adrienne. "Jane Eyre: The Temptations of a Motherless Woman."
    *Ms. Magazine*, 1973.<sup>75</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

43. Rodas, Julia Miele. "Tiny Tim, Blind Bertha, and the Resistance of
    Miss Jane Eyre." *Journal of Literary & Cultural Disability
    Studies*, vol. 5, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1-17.<sup>79</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

44. Roland, Christine L. "Jane Eyre, The Invisible Bisexual: Bisexual
    Erasure in Historical Literature." *Pandion: The Osprey Journal of
    Research and Ideas*, vol. 2, no. 1, 2017. <sup>82</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

45. Rowe, Karen E. "'Fairy-Born and Human-Bred': Jane Eyre's Education
    in Romance." *The Voyage In: Fictions of Female Development*, edited
    by Elizabeth Abel et al., University Press of New England, 1983, pp.
    69-89.<sup>124</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

46. Schneck, Jena. "Looking at Blindness in Jane Eyre." *English
    Symposium*, vol. 24, 2017. <sup>86</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

47. Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. "Three Women's Texts and a Critique of
    Imperialism." *Critical Inquiry*, vol. 12, no. 1, 1985, pp.
    243-261.<sup>74</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

48. Tatlock, Lynne. *Jane Eyre in German Lands: The Import of Romance,
    1848–1918*. Bloomsbury Academic, 2022.<sup>30</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

49. Thormählen, Marianne. *The Brontës and Religion*. Cambridge
    University Press, 1999.<sup>134</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

50. Towe, Kristin. "The Fire and the Hearth: An Exploration of Gender
    Reversal and Early Feminism through Pyrocentric Symbolism in Jane
    Eyre." *Aletheia*, vol. 4, no. 1, 2019. <sup>65</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

51. Tressler, Beth. *The Sentimental Sufferer: Illness in the
    Nineteenth-Century Novel*. Routledge, 2017.<sup>80</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

52. Vallo, Mary. "Narrative control and the monster within: Empowering
    disability in Jane Eyre." *Hektoen International*, 2018.
    <sup>79</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

53. Woolf, Virginia. *A Room of One's Own*. Hogarth Press,
    1929.<sup>124</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Popular Sources (Reputable Magazines, Newspapers, Documentaries)

54. "Brontë, Charlotte." *Britannica Academic*, Encyclopædia
    Britannica, 2023. <sup>1</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

55. "Charlotte Brontë." *Gale*,
    [<u>www.gale.com/intl/databases-explored/literature/charlotte-bronte</u>](https://www.gale.com/intl/databases-explored/literature/charlotte-bronte).
    Accessed 2025. <sup>8</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

56. "Charlotte Brontë." *Wikipedia*,
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlotte_Bront%C3%AB. Accessed 2025.
    <sup>9</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

57. "Critical Reception of Jane Eyre." *Duke University Libraries*,
    sites.duke.edu/unsuitable/critical-reception-of-jane-eyre/.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>2</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

58. "Historical Context and Settings (Jane Eyre)." *Revision World*,
    [<u>revisionworld.com/a2-level-level-revision/english-literature-gcse-level/jane-eyre-charlotte-bronte/historical-context-and-settings-jane-eyre</u>](https://revisionworld.com/a2-level-level-revision/english-literature-gcse-level/jane-eyre-charlotte-bronte/historical-context-and-settings-jane-eyre).
    Accessed 2025. <sup>12</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

59. "Jane Eyre and the 19th century woman." *The British Library*,
    www.britishlibrary.cn/en/articles/jane-eyre-and-the-19th-century-woman/.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>67</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

60. "Jane Eyre and the Arts." *All for One*, 31 Mar. 2016,
    allforonefw.org/jane-eyre-and-the-arts/. <sup>135</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

61. "Jane Eyre Historical Context." *Save My Exams*,
    [<u>www.savemyexams.com/gcse/english-literature/aqa/17/revision-notes/2-the-19th-century-novel/jane-eyre/jane-eyre-context/</u>](https://www.savemyexams.com/gcse/english-literature/aqa/17/revision-notes/2-the-19th-century-novel/jane-eyre/jane-eyre-context/).
    Accessed 2025. <sup>10</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

62. "Jane Eyre Quotes." *SparkNotes*,
    [<u>www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/quotes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/quotes/).
    Accessed 2025. <sup>64</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

63. "Jane Eyre Symbols." *SparkNotes*,
    [<u>www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/symbols/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/symbols/).
    Accessed 2025. <sup>63</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

64. "Jane Eyre Themes." *SparkNotes*,
    [<u>www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/themes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/themes/).
    Accessed 2025. <sup>69</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

65. Shuttleworth, Sally. "Jane Eyre and the 19th Century Woman." *The
    British Library*, 15 May 2014. <sup>67</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

66. "Ten-Minute Book Club: Brontë, Jane Eyre." *University of Oxford,
    Faculty of English*,
    www.english.ox.ac.uk/ten-minute-book-club/bronte-jane-eyre.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>5</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

67. "The Brontë Myth (review)." *Publishers Weekly*, 1 Jan. 2004,
    [<u>www.publishersweekly.com/9780375412776</u>](https://www.publishersweekly.com/9780375412776).
    <sup>132</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

68. "Was Jane Eyre a Feminist?" *Bookishly*,
    www.bookishly.co.uk/blogs/news/was-jane-eyre-a-feminist.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>78</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

#### Digital and Multimedia Sources

69. @chrisnaturallyrp. "Do you think, because I am poor, obscure, plain
    and little, I am soulless and heartless?" *TikTok*, 7 Apr. 2024,
    [<u>www.tiktok.com/@chrisnaturallyrp/video/7490565395879857430</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@chrisnaturallyrp/video/7490565395879857430).
    <sup>116</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

70. @mariannasreads. "Jane Eyre is more than a book, it's a mindset."
    *TikTok*, 2025,
    [<u>www.tiktok.com/@mariannasreads/video/7528511299316157709</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@mariannasreads/video/7528511299316157709).
    <sup>113</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

71. @sparknotes\_. "Reader, I married him." *TikTok*, 18 Mar. 2024,
    [<u>www.tiktok.com/@sparknotes\_/video/7347708472152034603</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@sparknotes_/video/7347708472152034603).
    <sup>87</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

72. *Adaptations of Jane Eyre*. Wikipedia,
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_Jane_Eyre. Accessed 2025.
    <sup>91</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

73. Brontë Society. *The Brontë Parsonage Museum*, www.bronte.org.uk/.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>138</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

74. Caldwell, Thomas. "Film Review: Jane Eyre (2011)." *Cinema Autopsy*,
    11 Aug. 2011,
    [<u>blog.cinemaautopsy.com/2011/08/11/film-review-jane-eyre-2011/</u>](https://blog.cinemaautopsy.com/2011/08/11/film-review-jane-eyre-2011/).
    <sup>101</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

75. *Jane Eyre (2006 TV series)*. Wikipedia,
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre\_(2006_TV_series). Accessed 2025.
    <sup>97</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

76. *Jane Eyre (Manga Classics)*. Goodreads,
    [<u>www.goodreads.com/book/show/26591771-jane-eyre</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26591771-jane-eyre).
    Accessed 2025. <sup>104</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

77. "Jane Eyre - zwiastun PL." *YouTube*, uploaded by Cinema City
    Poland, 2011,
    [<u>www.youtube.com/watch?v=lGJvsTLh2no</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lGJvsTLh2no).
    <sup>144</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

78. "Mapping translation – on the trail of Jane Eyre." *Creative
    Multilingualism*, University of Oxford, 2019,
    www.creativeml.ox.ac.uk/blog/exploring-multilingualism/mapping-translation-trail-jane-eyre/index.html.
    <sup>27</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

79. "Prismatic Jane Eyre Schools Project." *Stephen Spender Trust*,
    www.stephen-spender.org/our-projects/prismatic-jane-eyre/.
    Accessed 2025. <sup>51</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

80. Vallo, Mary. "Narrative control and the monster within: Empowering
    disability in Jane Eyre." *Hektoen International*, 2018.
    <sup>79</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

### Missing Sources Note

- **Topics where reliable sources couldn't be found**:

  - Specific data on *Jane Eyre*'s official status (mandatory or
    supplementary reading) within the Polish national school curriculum
    (*podstawa programowa*) across different historical periods.

  - Statistical data on the frequency of *Jane Eyre* appearing as a
    topic or source text on the Polish *matura* (final high school
    exam).

  - Detailed Polish critical reception from literary magazines in the
    late 19th and early 20th centuries. While the existence of the first
    translation is well-documented, its immediate critical analysis in
    Polish journals requires deeper archival research in sources like
    the Polska Bibliografia Literacka (PBL).

  - Information on Polish fanfiction communities specifically dedicated
    to *Jane Eyre*.

- **Claims that need verification**:

  - The exact number of subsequent Polish translations after the first
    five documented in academic sources. Popular market editions may
    exist that are not yet part of scholarly analysis.

  - The existence of any full Polish film or television adaptations
    beyond subtitled foreign versions.

- **Areas requiring further research**:

  - A comparative analysis of the five Polish translations to trace the
    evolution of translation norms and the portrayal of Jane's character
    in each.

  - Interviews or surveys with Polish educators and students to gather
    contemporary perspectives on teaching and reading the novel in
    Poland.

  - Deeper research into the reception of *Jane Eyre* in less-documented
    linguistic areas, such as the Balkans, Africa (beyond Amharic), and
    Southeast Asia, to build a more complete global picture.

#### Cytowane prace

1.  Charlotte Bronte \| Biography, Books, Novels, Jane Eyre, & Facts
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/biography/Charlotte-Bronte</u>](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Charlotte-Bronte)

2.  Critical Reception of Jane Eyre – UNSUITABLE - Sites@Duke Express,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://sites.duke.edu/unsuitable/critical-reception-of-jane-eyre/</u>](https://sites.duke.edu/unsuitable/critical-reception-of-jane-eyre/)

3.  Jane Eyre (1st edition) - Wikisource, the free online library,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre\_(1st_edition)</u>](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre_(1st_edition))

4.  Jane Eyre Quotes by Charlotte Brontë - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/2977639-jane-eyre-an-autobiography</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/2977639-jane-eyre-an-autobiography)

5.  Jane Eyre by Charlotte Brontë \| Faculty of English, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.english.ox.ac.uk/ten-minute-book-club/bronte-jane-eyre</u>](https://www.english.ox.ac.uk/ten-minute-book-club/bronte-jane-eyre)

6.  A voice and a place of one's own: women, knowledge and empowerment
    in Charlotte Brontë's «Jane Eyre - La clé des langues, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://cle.ens-lyon.fr/anglais/litterature/litterature-britannique/women-knowledge-and-empowerment-in-charlotte-bronte-s-jane-eyre</u>](https://cle.ens-lyon.fr/anglais/litterature/litterature-britannique/women-knowledge-and-empowerment-in-charlotte-bronte-s-jane-eyre)

7.  Jane Eyre - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre)

8.  Charlotte Brontë \| Databases Explored - Gale, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.gale.com/intl/databases-explored/literature/charlotte-bronte</u>](https://www.gale.com/intl/databases-explored/literature/charlotte-bronte)

9.  Charlotte Brontë - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlotte_Bront%C3%AB</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlotte_Bront%C3%AB)

10. Jane Eyre Context - GCSE English Literature - Save My Exams,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.savemyexams.com/gcse/english-literature/aqa/17/revision-notes/2-the-19th-century-novel/jane-eyre/jane-eyre-context/</u>](https://www.savemyexams.com/gcse/english-literature/aqa/17/revision-notes/2-the-19th-century-novel/jane-eyre/jane-eyre-context/)

11. Charlotte Bronte's Life and Her Experiences Mirrored in Jane Eyre \|
    COVE, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://editions.covecollective.org/content/charlotte-brontes-life-and-her-experiences-mirrored-jane-eyre</u>](https://editions.covecollective.org/content/charlotte-brontes-life-and-her-experiences-mirrored-jane-eyre)

12. Historical Context and Settings (Jane Eyre) - GCSE English
    Literature Revision, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://revisionworld.com/a2-level-level-revision/english-literature-gcse-level/jane-eyre-charlotte-bronte/historical-context-and-settings-jane-eyre</u>](https://revisionworld.com/a2-level-level-revision/english-literature-gcse-level/jane-eyre-charlotte-bronte/historical-context-and-settings-jane-eyre)

13. Historical background Jane Eyre: Advanced - York Notes, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.yorknotes.com/alevel/english-literature/jane-eyre/study/background/04010000_historical-background</u>](https://www.yorknotes.com/alevel/english-literature/jane-eyre/study/background/04010000_historical-background)

14. Jane Eyre as Seen Throughout the Times - Radboud Educational
    Repository, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://theses.ubn.ru.nl/server/api/core/bitstreams/aca852bd-a200-4f40-b344-a95459493871/content</u>](https://theses.ubn.ru.nl/server/api/core/bitstreams/aca852bd-a200-4f40-b344-a95459493871/content)

15. Review: The Brontë Myth \| The Literary Omnivore - WordPress.com,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://theliteraryomnivore.wordpress.com/2012/06/25/review-the-bronte-myth/</u>](https://theliteraryomnivore.wordpress.com/2012/06/25/review-the-bronte-myth/)

16. The Bronte Myth (review) - Project MUSE, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://muse.jhu.edu/article/168595/summary</u>](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/168595/summary)

17. Review: The Brontë Myth, Lucasta Miller - Girl with her Head in a
    Book, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://girlwithherheadinabook.co.uk/2016/04/review-the-bronte-myth-lucasta-miller.html</u>](https://girlwithherheadinabook.co.uk/2016/04/review-the-bronte-myth-lucasta-miller.html)

18. Brooding About The Brontës: The Bronte Myth - Girl with her Head in
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://girlwithherheadinabook.co.uk/2016/04/the-bronte-myth.html</u>](https://girlwithherheadinabook.co.uk/2016/04/the-bronte-myth.html)

19. Charlotte Brontë \| EBSCO Research Starters, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/history/charlotte-bronte</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/history/charlotte-bronte)

20. Brontë family - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bront%C3%AB_family</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bront%C3%AB_family)

21. Jane Eyre - Charlotte Brontë (1816-55) - Royal Collection Trust,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.rct.uk/collection/1080085/jane-eyre</u>](https://www.rct.uk/collection/1080085/jane-eyre)

22. Reception and early critical reviews Jane Eyre: Advanced - York
    Notes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.yorknotes.com/alevel/english-literature/jane-eyre/study/3_critical-history</u>](https://www.yorknotes.com/alevel/english-literature/jane-eyre/study/3_critical-history)

23. theses.ubn.ru.nl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://theses.ubn.ru.nl/server/api/core/bitstreams/aca852bd-a200-4f40-b344-a95459493871/content#:~:text=In%20the%20nineteenth%20century%2C%20critics,Jane%20Eyre%20as%20an%20autobiography.</u>](https://theses.ubn.ru.nl/server/api/core/bitstreams/aca852bd-a200-4f40-b344-a95459493871/content#:~:text=In%20the%20nineteenth%20century%2C%20critics,Jane%20Eyre%20as%20an%20autobiography.)

24. How can you read a novel in hundreds of translations? (and why would
    you want to?), otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blogs.openbookpublishers.com/how-can-you-read-a-novel-in-hundreds-of-translations-and-why-would-you-want-to/</u>](https://blogs.openbookpublishers.com/how-can-you-read-a-novel-in-hundreds-of-translations-and-why-would-you-want-to/)

25. Prismatic Jane Eyre: Close-Reading a World Novel Across Languages \|
    Open Book Publishers, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.openbookpublishers.com/books/10.11647/obp.0319</u>](https://www.openbookpublishers.com/books/10.11647/obp.0319)

26. Prismatic Jane Eyre: Close-Reading a World Novel Across Languages \|
    Faculty of English, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.english.ox.ac.uk/article/prismatic-jane-eyre-close-reading-a-world-novel-across-languages</u>](https://www.english.ox.ac.uk/article/prismatic-jane-eyre-close-reading-a-world-novel-across-languages)

27. Mapping translation – on the trail of Jane Eyre \| Creative ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.creativeml.ox.ac.uk/blog/exploring-multilingualism/mapping-translation-trail-jane-eyre/index.html</u>](https://www.creativeml.ox.ac.uk/blog/exploring-multilingualism/mapping-translation-trail-jane-eyre/index.html)

28. German Jane Eyre, 1848-1914 \| Humanities Digital Workshop,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://hdw.wustl.edu/browse/german-jane-eyre-1848-1914</u>](https://hdw.wustl.edu/browse/german-jane-eyre-1848-1914)

29. The Mystery of the Past Haunts Again: Jane Eyre and Eugenie
    Marlitt's Die zweite Frau, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://journals.openedition.org/lisa/3510</u>](https://journals.openedition.org/lisa/3510)

30. Jane Eyre in German Lands: The Import of Romance, 1848–1918 -
    Bloomsbury Publishing, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bloomsbury.com/us/jane-eyre-in-german-lands-9781501382369/</u>](https://www.bloomsbury.com/us/jane-eyre-in-german-lands-9781501382369/)

31. Jane Eyre in German Lands: The Import of Romance, 1848–1918 -
    Bloomsbury Publishing, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bloomsbury.com/us/jane-eyre-in-german-lands-9781501382376/</u>](https://www.bloomsbury.com/us/jane-eyre-in-german-lands-9781501382376/)

32. www.euppublishing.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/10.3366/gothic.2021.0104#:~:text=The%20first%20Russian%20translation%20of,an%20orphan%20and%20a%20governess.</u>](https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/10.3366/gothic.2021.0104#:~:text=The%20first%20Russian%20translation%20of,an%20orphan%20and%20a%20governess.)

33. The Gothic Tradition in Jane Eyre and The Woman in White in ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/10.3366/gothic.2021.0104</u>](https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/10.3366/gothic.2021.0104)

34. (PDF) The Gothic Tradition in Jane Eyre and The Woman in White in
    Russian Translations, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/358604441_The_Gothic_Tradition_in_Jane_Eyre_and_The_Woman_in_White_in_Russian_Translations</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/358604441_The_Gothic_Tradition_in_Jane_Eyre_and_The_Woman_in_White_in_Russian_Translations)

35. Female Images in Jane Eyre and The Woman in White in Russian
    Translations of the 1840–60s - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/314483960_Female_Images_in_Jane_Eyre_and_The_Woman_in_White_in_Russian_Translations_of_the_1840-60s</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/314483960_Female_Images_in_Jane_Eyre_and_The_Woman_in_White_in_Russian_Translations_of_the_1840-60s)

36. “A Russian Jane Eyre: Gothic Subjectivity and the Woman Question in
    Tur and Turgenev” \| Slavic Languages & Literatures, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://slavic.as.virginia.edu/russian-jane-eyre-gothic-subjectivity-and-woman-question-tur-and-turgenev</u>](https://slavic.as.virginia.edu/russian-jane-eyre-gothic-subjectivity-and-woman-question-tur-and-turgenev)

37. Serializing Victorian Fiction Abroad. The Earliest Translation of
    Jane Eyre in the Iberian Peninsula, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://diposit.ub.edu/dspace/bitstream/2445/215972/1/259979.pdf</u>](https://diposit.ub.edu/dspace/bitstream/2445/215972/1/259979.pdf)

38. A Relayed Translation. Looking for the Source Text of the First
    Polish Translation of Charlotte Brontë's Jane Eyre - ejournals,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ejournals.eu/pliki_artykulu_czasopisma/pelny_tekst/1a201c88-4b47-4bba-8634-f14b432422ba/pobierz</u>](https://ejournals.eu/pliki_artykulu_czasopisma/pelny_tekst/1a201c88-4b47-4bba-8634-f14b432422ba/pobierz)

39. Traduciendo a Charlotte Brontë - Jane Eyre's Library -
    WordPress.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://eyrelibrary.wordpress.com/2017/01/09/traduciendo-a-charlotte-bronte/</u>](https://eyrelibrary.wordpress.com/2017/01/09/traduciendo-a-charlotte-bronte/)

40. The Birth of a Myth The Early Spanish Reception of ... - Dialnet,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/8794299.pdf</u>](https://dialnet.unirioja.es/descarga/articulo/8794299.pdf)

41. www.tandfonline.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1179/bst.2002.27.2.91#:~:text=In%201896%2C%20forty%2Dnine%20years,which%20covered%20only%20fourteen%20chapters.</u>](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1179/bst.2002.27.2.91#:~:text=In%201896%2C%20forty%2Dnine%20years,which%20covered%20only%20fourteen%20chapters.)

42. The Brontës in Japan: How Jane Eyre was received in the Meiji ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272310754_The_Brontes_in_Japan_How_Jane_Eyre_was_received_in_the_Meiji_Period_1868-1912</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272310754_The_Brontes_in_Japan_How_Jane_Eyre_was_received_in_the_Meiji_Period_1868-1912)

43. The Poetic Destiny of Jane Eyre in Chinese, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://books.openbookpublishers.com/10.11647/obp.0319.19.pdf</u>](https://books.openbookpublishers.com/10.11647/obp.0319.19.pdf)

44. '… \[A\]s much soul … and full as much heart': Translation and
    Reception of the Brontë Sisters in China \| The British Library,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britishlibrary.cn/en/articles/much-soul-full-much-heart%E2%80%A8-translation-reception-bronte-sisters-china/</u>](https://www.britishlibrary.cn/en/articles/much-soul-full-much-heart%E2%80%A8-translation-reception-bronte-sisters-china/)

45. The Popularity of Jane Eyre in China - ResearchGate, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264360887_The_Popularity_of_Jane_Eyre_in_China</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264360887_The_Popularity_of_Jane_Eyre_in_China)

46. A Relayed Translation. Looking for the Source Text of the First
    Polish Translation of Charlotte Brontë's Jane Eyre - ejournals,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ejournals.eu/en/journal/studia-litteraria-uic/article/a-relayed-translation-looking-for-the-source-text-of-the-first-polish-translation-of-charlotte-brontes-jane-eyre</u>](https://ejournals.eu/en/journal/studia-litteraria-uic/article/a-relayed-translation-looking-for-the-source-text-of-the-first-polish-translation-of-charlotte-brontes-jane-eyre)

47. The evolution of translation standards as illustrated by the history
    of Polish translations of Jane Eyre by Charlotte Brontë -
    Uniwersytet w Białymstoku, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://czasopisma.filologia.uwb.edu.pl/index.php/c/article/view/683</u>](https://czasopisma.filologia.uwb.edu.pl/index.php/c/article/view/683)

48. Emilia Dobrzańska, née Karczewska (1852-1925) - Prismatic Jane Eyre,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://prismaticjaneeyre.org/emilia-dobrzanska-nee-karczewska-1852-1925/</u>](https://prismaticjaneeyre.org/emilia-dobrzanska-nee-karczewska-1852-1925/)

49. 100 książek must read, obowiązkowa lektura dla każdego -
    Opinieouczelniach.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://opinieouczelniach.pl/artykul/100-ksiazek-must-read-obowiazkowa-lektura-dla-kazdego/</u>](https://opinieouczelniach.pl/artykul/100-ksiazek-must-read-obowiazkowa-lektura-dla-kazdego/)

50. Dziwne losy Jane Eyre (ekskluzywna edycja) - Charlotte Bronte -
    Książka w Księgarnia Świat Książki, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.swiatksiazki.pl/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-ekskluzywna-edycja-6698511-ksiazka.html</u>](https://www.swiatksiazki.pl/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-ekskluzywna-edycja-6698511-ksiazka.html)

51. Prismatic Jane Eyre - Stephen Spender Trust, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.stephen-spender.org/our-projects/prismatic-jane-eyre/</u>](https://www.stephen-spender.org/our-projects/prismatic-jane-eyre/)

52. Prismatic Jane Eyre Schools Project: teaching resources now
    available \| Faculty of English, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.english.ox.ac.uk/article/prismatic-jane-eyre-schools-project-teaching-resources-now-available</u>](https://www.english.ox.ac.uk/article/prismatic-jane-eyre-schools-project-teaching-resources-now-available)

53. Prismatic Jane Eyre Resources - Stephen Spender Trust, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.stephen-spender.org/our-projects/prismatic-jane-eyre/prismatic-jane-eyre-resources/</u>](https://www.stephen-spender.org/our-projects/prismatic-jane-eyre/prismatic-jane-eyre-resources/)

54. My Pale Rusalka, a True Heathen: Reading Polish Jane Eyre across
    Centuries - Research Explorer The University of Manchester,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://research.manchester.ac.uk/en/publications/my-pale-rusalka-a-true-heathen-reading-polish-jane-eyre-across-ce</u>](https://research.manchester.ac.uk/en/publications/my-pale-rusalka-a-true-heathen-reading-polish-jane-eyre-across-ce)

55. "Dziwne losy Jane Eyre" - Ch. Brontë (1847) - audiobook - część I -
    YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1w82MA9bzgk</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1w82MA9bzgk)

56. In Search of English Counterparts for 6 Classic Polish Novels \|
    Article - Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/article/in-search-of-english-counterparts-for-6-classic-polish-novels</u>](https://culture.pl/en/article/in-search-of-english-counterparts-for-6-classic-polish-novels)

57. Dziwna miłość Jane Eyre - Teatr Polskiego Radia \| e-teatr.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://e-teatr.pl/pl/realizacje/65527,szczegoly.html</u>](https://e-teatr.pl/pl/realizacje/65527,szczegoly.html)

58. Dziwne losy Jane Eyre - Charlotte Brontë \| Książka w
    Lubimyczytac.pl - Opinie, oceny, ceny, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5191463/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5191463/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre)

59. Dziwne losy Jane Eyre - Bronte Charlotte \| Książka w Empik,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.empik.com/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-bronte-charlotte,p1257212806,ksiazka-p</u>](https://www.empik.com/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-bronte-charlotte,p1257212806,ksiazka-p)

60. Charlotte Brontë - "Dziwne losy Jane Eyre". - Strona Główna -
    Pisarze polscy, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pisarzepolscy.pl/wiadomosci/pokaz/215,charlotte-bronte-dziwne-losy-jane-eyre</u>](https://pisarzepolscy.pl/wiadomosci/pokaz/215,charlotte-bronte-dziwne-losy-jane-eyre)

61. Dziwne losy Jane Eyre - Charlotte Bronte - Polska Ksiegarnia w UK,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ksiegarniainternetowa.co.uk/pl/dziwne_losy_jane_eyre-9788380314016</u>](https://ksiegarniainternetowa.co.uk/pl/dziwne_losy_jane_eyre-9788380314016)

62. "Dziwne losy Jane Eyre" - Charlotte Brontë - Kultowy.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://kultowy.pl/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre</u>](https://kultowy.pl/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre)

63. Jane Eyre: Symbols \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/symbols/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/symbols/)

64. Jane Eyre: Famous Quotes Explained - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/quotes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/quotes/)

65. The Fire and the Hearth: An Exploration of Gender Reversal and ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://alphachihonor.org/headquarters/files/Website%20Files/Aletheia/Volume%204%20Issue%201%20Spring%202019/Fire-and-Hearth-Early-Feminism-through-Pyrocentric-Symbolism-in-Jane-Eyre-Kristin-Towe.pdf</u>](https://alphachihonor.org/headquarters/files/Website%20Files/Aletheia/Volume%204%20Issue%201%20Spring%202019/Fire-and-Hearth-Early-Feminism-through-Pyrocentric-Symbolism-in-Jane-Eyre-Kristin-Towe.pdf)

66. Jane Eyre: Motifs - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/motifs/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/motifs/)

67. Jane Eyre and the 19th century woman \| The British Library,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britishlibrary.cn/en/articles/jane-eyre-and-the-19th-century-woman/</u>](https://www.britishlibrary.cn/en/articles/jane-eyre-and-the-19th-century-woman/)

68. Imagery and symbolism Jane Eyre: Advanced - York Notes, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.yorknotes.com/alevel/english-literature/jane-eyre/study/critical-approaches/02040000_imagery-and-symbolism</u>](https://www.yorknotes.com/alevel/english-literature/jane-eyre/study/critical-approaches/02040000_imagery-and-symbolism)

69. Jane Eyre: Themes - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/themes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/themes/)

70. Jane Eyre: An Analysis in 8 Literary Elements - literature...no
    trouble, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.literature-no-trouble.com/jane-eyre-an-analysis-in-8-literary-elements/</u>](https://www.literature-no-trouble.com/jane-eyre-an-analysis-in-8-literary-elements/)

71. Depiction of Gothic Elements as an Instrument in the Journey of Jane
    Eyre's Self- Discovery and Personal Development - IJNRD, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ijnrd.org/papers/IJNRD2410160.pdf</u>](https://ijnrd.org/papers/IJNRD2410160.pdf)

72. A Feminist Interpretation of the Novel Jane Eyre by Author Charlotte
    Brontë - International Journal of Social Science And Human Research,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ijsshr.in/v7i12/Doc/26.pdf</u>](https://ijsshr.in/v7i12/Doc/26.pdf)

73. Jane Eyre and its Heteroglossia, Colonialism, Class Struggle, Racial
    Otherness and the Significance of the British Empire - IJELS,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ijels.com/upload_document/issue_files/38IJELS-102202019-JaneEyre.pdf</u>](https://ijels.com/upload_document/issue_files/38IJELS-102202019-JaneEyre.pdf)

74. Disabled and Colonized: Bertha Mason in JANE EYRE - Taylor & Francis
    Online, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00144940.2016.1176001</u>](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00144940.2016.1176001)

75. "Contradiction in Jane Eyre: Conversations of 19th Century Feminism"
    by Audrey Clement, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://marymount.edu/academics/college-of-sciences-and-humanities/school-of-interdisciplinary-studies/student-publications/magnificat-2022/contradiction-in-jane-eyre/</u>](https://marymount.edu/academics/college-of-sciences-and-humanities/school-of-interdisciplinary-studies/student-publications/magnificat-2022/contradiction-in-jane-eyre/)

76. Feminist Fridays: What's the Deal with Jane Eyre? - The Adroit
    Journal, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://theadroitjournal.org/2019/04/15/jane-eyre-feminism/</u>](https://theadroitjournal.org/2019/04/15/jane-eyre-feminism/)

77. 30+ of the best quotes from "Jane Eyre" \| Audible.com, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.audible.com/blog/quotes-jane-eyre</u>](https://www.audible.com/blog/quotes-jane-eyre)

78. Was Jane Eyre a Feminist? - Bookishly, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bookishly.co.uk/blogs/news/was-jane-eyre-a-feminist</u>](https://www.bookishly.co.uk/blogs/news/was-jane-eyre-a-feminist)

79. Narrative control and the monster within: Empowering disability in
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://hekint.org/2018/01/30/narrative-control-monster-within-empowering-disability-jane-eyre/</u>](https://hekint.org/2018/01/30/narrative-control-monster-within-empowering-disability-jane-eyre/)

80. Mental Illness and Human Dignity in Jane Eyre - UNM Digital
    Repository, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://digitalrepository.unm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1009&context=ugresearchaward_2022</u>](https://digitalrepository.unm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1009&context=ugresearchaward_2022)

81. Queer Theory - Mr Hoyes IB website, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://mrhoyesibwebsite.com/Critical%20Theory/Other%20Theories/Queer%20Theory.htm</u>](http://mrhoyesibwebsite.com/Critical%20Theory/Other%20Theories/Queer%20Theory.htm)

82. Jane Eyre, The Invisible Bisexual: Bisexual Erasure in Historical
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://digitalcommons.unf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1060&context=pandion_unf</u>](https://digitalcommons.unf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1060&context=pandion_unf)

83. “THE LOVE THAT DARES TO SPEAK ITS NAME: QUEER LANGUAGE AND FEMALE
    HOMOEROTICISM IN OROONOKO, JANE EYRE, AND AURORA LEIGH.” - GETD,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://getd.libs.uga.edu/pdfs/hasty_sayler_m_201405_ma.pdf</u>](https://getd.libs.uga.edu/pdfs/hasty_sayler_m_201405_ma.pdf)

84. Reading the Intersections of Mental Illness and Masculinity in Jane
    Eyre By, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://cdr.lib.unc.edu/downloads/6m311t176</u>](https://cdr.lib.unc.edu/downloads/6m311t176)

85. Did the “Woman in the Attic” in Jane Eyre Have Huntington Disease? -
    PMC, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4518130/</u>](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4518130/)

86. The Blind Can See: Revisiting Disability in Jane Eyre - BYU
    ScholarsArchive, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1052&context=english_symposium</u>](https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1052&context=english_symposium)

87. \#booktok \#janeeyre \#classicliterature \#littok \#charlottebronte
    \| you should know this too \| TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@sparknotes\_/video/7347708472152034603</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@sparknotes_/video/7347708472152034603)

88. Jane Eyre: A Passionate Adaptation of a Classic Novel - Focus
    Features, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.focusfeatures.com/article/a_classic_novel\_\_\_a_passionate_adaptation\_\_the_production_of\_\_</u>](https://www.focusfeatures.com/article/a_classic_novel___a_passionate_adaptation__the_production_of__)

89. Jane Eyre in Popular Culture - Headlines@Hopkins: Johns Hopkins
    University News Releases, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pages.jh.edu/news_info/news/event07/jun07/eyre.html</u>](https://pages.jh.edu/news_info/news/event07/jun07/eyre.html)

90. A Brief Chronology of Jane Eyre Adaptations - COVE, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://editions.covecollective.org/chronologies/brief-chronology-jane-eyre-adaptations</u>](https://editions.covecollective.org/chronologies/brief-chronology-jane-eyre-adaptations)

91. Adaptations of Jane Eyre - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_Jane_Eyre</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_Jane_Eyre)

92. Jane Eyre (1943 film) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre\_(1943_film)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre_(1943_film))

93. Silver Screen Standards: Jane Eyre (1943) \| Classic Movie Hub Blog,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.classicmoviehub.com/blog/silver-screen-standards-jane-eyre-1943/</u>](https://www.classicmoviehub.com/blog/silver-screen-standards-jane-eyre-1943/)

94. Jane Eyre: At the movies (1943) — The Greatest Literature of All
    Time - Editor Eric, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.editoreric.com/greatlit/movies/Jane-Eyre-1943.html</u>](http://www.editoreric.com/greatlit/movies/Jane-Eyre-1943.html)

95. "JANE EYRE" (1943) Review - lmoore66 - LiveJournal, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lmoore66.livejournal.com/71076.html</u>](https://lmoore66.livejournal.com/71076.html)

96. Jane Eyre: Movie Adaptations \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/movie-adaptations/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/movie-adaptations/)

97. Jane Eyre (2006 TV series) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre\_(2006_TV_series)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jane_Eyre_(2006_TV_series))

98. Jane Eyre: 2006 Miniseries - Doux Reviews, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.douxreviews.com/2013/09/jane-eyre.html</u>](https://www.douxreviews.com/2013/09/jane-eyre.html)

99. Anyone here who enjoys watching "Jane Eyre" 2006 version (Ruth
    Wilson / Toby Stephens)? : r/JaneEyre - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/JaneEyre/comments/1bsv4ej/anyone_here_who_enjoys_watching_jane_eyre_2006/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/JaneEyre/comments/1bsv4ej/anyone_here_who_enjoys_watching_jane_eyre_2006/)

100. A Bold New Timeless Classic: Fukunaga's Partial Reading of Jane
     ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://journals.openedition.org/babel/146</u>](https://journals.openedition.org/babel/146)

101. Film review – Jane Eyre (2011) – CINEMA AUTOPSY, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://blog.cinemaautopsy.com/2011/08/11/film-review-jane-eyre-2011/</u>](https://blog.cinemaautopsy.com/2011/08/11/film-review-jane-eyre-2011/)

102. Movie Review: Jane Eyre (2011) - BlogSophia, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://blogsophia.me/blog/movie-review-jane-eyre-2011</u>](https://blogsophia.me/blog/movie-review-jane-eyre-2011)

103. A Comparative Analysis of Jane Eyre and Wide Sargasso Sea - IS
     MUNI, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://is.muni.cz/th/m0w7o/BA_THESIS_Violova_Archive.pdf</u>](https://is.muni.cz/th/m0w7o/BA_THESIS_Violova_Archive.pdf)

104. Jane Eyre (Manga Classics) by Stacy King \| Goodreads, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26591771-jane-eyre</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26591771-jane-eyre)

105. Pcat's Jane Eyre \| WEBTOON, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.webtoons.com/en/canvas/pcats-jane-eyre/list?title_no=573943</u>](https://www.webtoons.com/en/canvas/pcats-jane-eyre/list?title_no=573943)

106. Jane Eyre \| WEBTOON, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.webtoons.com/en/canvas/jane-eyre/list?title_no=1017839</u>](https://www.webtoons.com/en/canvas/jane-eyre/list?title_no=1017839)

107. Jane Eyre fan fiction (11 books) - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/list/show/105363.Jane_Eyre_fan_fiction</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/list/show/105363.Jane_Eyre_fan_fiction)

108. Jane Eyre Fanfiction? - Costume Drama - LiveJournal, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://bbccostumedrama.livejournal.com/166117.html</u>](https://bbccostumedrama.livejournal.com/166117.html)

109. Jane - 000hari - Wattpad, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.wattpad.com/list/533388179-jane-eyre</u>](https://www.wattpad.com/list/533388179-jane-eyre)

110. Jane eyre : r/FanFiction - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/FanFiction/comments/1k0a470/jane_eyre/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/FanFiction/comments/1k0a470/jane_eyre/)

111. Anyone know of any JE fanfic around? : r/JaneEyre - Reddit,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/JaneEyre/comments/1bfpsna/anyone_know_of_any_je_fanfic_around/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/JaneEyre/comments/1bfpsna/anyone_know_of_any_je_fanfic_around/)

112. Ao3 Stories - Pinterest, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.pinterest.com/ideas/ao3-stories/934491103988/</u>](https://www.pinterest.com/ideas/ao3-stories/934491103988/)

113. Libros más esperados para la segunda mitad de 2025 - TikTok,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@mariannasreads/video/7528511299316157709</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@mariannasreads/video/7528511299316157709)

114. Jane Eyre: A Classic Literature Debate - TikTok, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@michael.aldag/video/7514718377470856470</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@michael.aldag/video/7514718377470856470)

115. Celebrating Jane Eyre: A Classic Book Discussion - TikTok,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@thelovelythings505/video/7204888681314864430</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@thelovelythings505/video/7204888681314864430)

116. Explore Jane Eyre: A Journey Through Classic Literature \| TikTok,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@chrisnaturallyrp/video/7490565395879857430</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@chrisnaturallyrp/video/7490565395879857430)

117. Jane Eyre; ou Les mémoires d'une institutrice by Charlotte Brontë
     \| Project Gutenberg, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/16235</u>](http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/16235)

118. Charlotte Brontë i "Dziwne losy Jane Eyre" - Historia - PR24.PL,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://polskieradio24.pl/artykul/2719002,charlotte-bronte-i-dziwne-losy-jane-eyre</u>](https://polskieradio24.pl/artykul/2719002,charlotte-bronte-i-dziwne-losy-jane-eyre)

119. Dziwne losy Jane Eyre cytaty \| Lubimyczytać.pl, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/cytaty/5191463/ksiazka/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/cytaty/5191463/ksiazka/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre)

120. Cytaty z książki "Dziwne Losy Jane Eyre" - nakanapie.pl, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://nakanapie.pl/ksiazka/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-888224/cytaty</u>](https://nakanapie.pl/ksiazka/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-888224/cytaty)

121. Dziwne losy Jane Eyre - Wydawnictwo Świat Książki, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://wydawnictwoswiatksiazki.pl/tytul/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-9788381398916/</u>](https://wydawnictwoswiatksiazki.pl/tytul/dziwne-losy-jane-eyre-9788381398916/)

122. Ten spektakl trzeba zobaczyć - Recenzja - Teatr Polonia, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.teatrpolonia.pl/pr/826583/ten-spektakl-trzeba-zobaczyc</u>](https://www.teatrpolonia.pl/pr/826583/ten-spektakl-trzeba-zobaczyc)

123. jane Eyre - CORE, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/76295437.pdf</u>](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/76295437.pdf)

124. Jane Eyre's Quest for Truth and Identity - Scholar Commons,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://scholarcommons.sc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1006&context=tor</u>](https://scholarcommons.sc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1006&context=tor)

125. Myths of power : a Marxist study of the Brontës - Stanford
     SearchWorks, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/1325595</u>](https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/1325595)

126. Manufactured Madness: Bertha Mason in the Crosshairs of Disability
     Discourse \| ISHAL PAITHRKAM, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://ojs.ishalpaithrkam.info/index.php/ishal/article/view/285</u>](https://ojs.ishalpaithrkam.info/index.php/ishal/article/view/285)

127. Reconciling Christianity and Paganism - The Cupola: Scholarship at
     ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://cupola.gettysburg.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1360&context=student_scholarship</u>](https://cupola.gettysburg.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1360&context=student_scholarship)

128. View of The Birth of a Myth: The Early Spanish Reception of
     Charlotte Brontë and Jane Eyre (1850s-1901), otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.atlantisjournal.org/index.php/atlantis/article/view/875/557</u>](https://www.atlantisjournal.org/index.php/atlantis/article/view/875/557)

129. Picturing Charlotte Brontë's Artistic Rebellion? Myths of the Woman
     Artist in Postfeminist Jane Eyre Screen Adaptations - Oxford
     Academic, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://academic.oup.com/adaptation/article/13/2/240/5813424</u>](https://academic.oup.com/adaptation/article/13/2/240/5813424)

130. The Bronte Myth (review) - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236748580_The_Bronte_Myth_review</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236748580_The_Bronte_Myth_review)

131. The Brontë Myth by Lucasta Miller - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://goodreads.com/book/show/75143.The_Bront\_\_Myth</u>](https://goodreads.com/book/show/75143.The_Bront__Myth)

132. The Bronte Myth - Publishers Weekly, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.publishersweekly.com/9780375412776</u>](https://www.publishersweekly.com/9780375412776)

133. otwierano: stycznia 1, 1970,
     [<u>https.girlwithherheadinabook.co.uk/2016/04/the-bronte-myth.html</u>](http://docs.google.com/https.girlwithherheadinabook.co.uk/2016/04/the-bronte-myth.html)

134. Jane Eyre and Education - The Cupola: Scholarship at Gettysburg
     ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://cupola.gettysburg.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1729&context=student_scholarship</u>](https://cupola.gettysburg.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1729&context=student_scholarship)

135. JANE EYRE and the Arts – all for One productions, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://allforonefw.org/jane-eyre-and-the-arts/</u>](https://allforonefw.org/jane-eyre-and-the-arts/)

136. otwierano: stycznia 1, 1970,
     [<u>https.www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/symbols/</u>](http://docs.google.com/https.www.sparknotes.com/lit/janeeyre/symbols/)

137. Category:Films based on Jane Eyre - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Films_based_on_Jane_Eyre</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Films_based_on_Jane_Eyre)

138. THE BRONTE SOCIETY - 529952 - Charity Commission, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://register-of-charities.charitycommission.gov.uk/en/about-the-register-of-charities/-/charity-details/529952/contact-information</u>](https://register-of-charities.charitycommission.gov.uk/en/about-the-register-of-charities/-/charity-details/529952/contact-information)

139. The Brontë Parsonage Museum: Home, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bronte.org.uk/</u>](https://www.bronte.org.uk/)

140. The Brontë Society \| The Brontë Parsonage Museum, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bronte.org.uk/about-us/the-bronte-society</u>](https://www.bronte.org.uk/about-us/the-bronte-society)

141. About \| bronteusa - WordPress.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://bronteusa.wordpress.com/about/</u>](https://bronteusa.wordpress.com/about/)

142. THE BRONTE SOCIETY - 529952 - Charity Commission, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://register-of-charities.charitycommission.gov.uk/en/about-the-register-of-charities/-/charity-details/529952?\_uk_gov_ccew_onereg_charitydetails_web_portlet_CharityDetailsPortlet_organisationNumber=529952</u>](https://register-of-charities.charitycommission.gov.uk/en/about-the-register-of-charities/-/charity-details/529952?_uk_gov_ccew_onereg_charitydetails_web_portlet_CharityDetailsPortlet_organisationNumber=529952)

143. Visit \| The Brontë Parsonage Museum, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bronte.org.uk/visit</u>](https://www.bronte.org.uk/visit)

144. Jane Eyre - zwiastun PL - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lGJvsTLh2no</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lGJvsTLh2no)
