# The Devil in Moscow: An International Dossier on Mikhail Bulgakov's ***The Master and Margarita***

Original Title: Мастер и Маргарита (Russian)

First Published: 1966–1967 (censored, serialized), 1967 (book form,
Paris)

## Why Should You Care? The Enduring Power of a Forbidden Book

Imagine a novel so potent that, more than 80 years after it was written,
a new film adaptation ignites a political firestorm in its home
country.<sup>1</sup> In January 2024, a Russian-made film of

*The Master and Margarita* hit theaters in Moscow. Despite becoming a
box-office smash, it was immediately attacked by pro-Putin propagandists
and nationalist activists.<sup>2</sup> They condemned its American-born,
anti-war director and its "anti-Soviet, and anti-modern Russian theme,"
even calling for a criminal investigation.<sup>1</sup> The film's crime?
Faithfully capturing the novel's core message: a fierce, satirical, and
unapologetic defense of artistic freedom against a crushing
authoritarian state.<sup>1</sup>

This modern controversy proves that Mikhail Bulgakov's masterpiece is
not some dusty classic to be studied for a test. It is a living,
breathing document about the timeless struggle between courage and
cowardice, truth and lies, and the individual versus the
system.<sup>3</sup> Its themes resonate powerfully with the challenges
of today, from navigating "cancel culture" and misinformation to finding
the courage to speak out against injustice.<sup>5</sup> Written in
secret under the shadow of Stalin's terror, this book is a testament to
the idea that true art cannot be silenced and that, as the Devil himself
declares in the novel, "manuscripts don't burn".<sup>7</sup> It is a
guide to surviving absurdity, a celebration of defiant love, and a
reminder that the most dangerous weapon against tyranny is a free
imagination.

## Forged in Fire: The Creation of ***The Master and Margarita***

### A Twelve-Year Secret

Mikhail Bulgakov did not simply write *The Master and Margarita*; he
bled for it over twelve torturous years, from 1928 until his death in
1940.<sup>9</sup> The novel evolved through at least six different
versions, a secret project he worked on while his public career as a
playwright was being systematically destroyed by Soviet
authorities.<sup>9</sup> His plays were banned, his name was scrubbed
from the press, and he was effectively silenced.<sup>10</sup>

### "Manuscripts Don't Burn"

In 1930, facing utter despair and believing he had no future as a writer
in the Soviet Union, Bulgakov took the first manuscript of his "novel
about the devil" and threw it into the fire.<sup>9</sup> This desperate
act of self-censorship is directly mirrored by the novel's protagonist,
the Master, who burns his own manuscript about Pontius Pilate after it
is savaged by state-approved critics.<sup>11</sup> For Bulgakov, this
was not the end. He restarted the novel in 1931, the act of destruction
becoming a point of purification.<sup>9</sup> The phrase "manuscripts
don't burn," spoken by the devil Woland to the Master, became the book's
defiant soul—a declaration that an idea, once created, can never be
truly erased.<sup>7</sup>

### The Author's Anguish

The novel is a deeply personal allegory for Bulgakov's own suffering.

- **The Persecuted Artist:** The Master's public denunciation, his
  descent into anxiety and paranoia, and his eventual retreat into a
  psychiatric hospital directly reflect Bulgakov's own experiences with
  state censorship and the toll it took on his mental
  health.<sup>11</sup> In the Soviet Union, psychiatric institutions
  were often used to silence dissidents, labeling them as "mad" for
  thinking differently.<sup>5</sup>

- **The Housing Crisis:** A constant, almost comical obsession in the
  novel is the desperate scramble for living space in
  Moscow.<sup>13</sup> Characters lie, cheat, and scheme to get a better
  apartment, like Berlioz's uncle who rushes from Kiev not to mourn but
  to claim his dead nephew's rooms.<sup>13</sup> This was a grim reality
  for Muscovites, and for Bulgakov himself, who wrote in his diary in
  1923, "There is only one major defect in my life – the lack of my own
  apartment".<sup>16</sup>

- **The Muse:** The character of Margarita—fierce, loving, and willing
  to sell her soul to save her beloved—was inspired by Bulgakov's third
  wife, Elena Shilovskaya.<sup>17</sup> She left a life of privilege as
  the wife of a high-ranking Red Army officer to be with the disgraced
  writer, becoming his secretary, editor, and protector.<sup>17</sup>
  After Bulgakov's death, it was Elena who hid the manuscript for
  decades, ensuring its survival.<sup>12</sup>

### The Paradox of Stalin's Patronage

Bulgakov's relationship with the Soviet state was defined by a bizarre
paradox. While the official literary apparatus and secret police (the
NKVD) harassed him, confiscated his diary, and banned his works, he was
personally protected from arrest by Joseph Stalin.<sup>19</sup> Stalin
had a particular fondness for Bulgakov's play

*The Days of the Turbins*, a sympathetic portrayal of anti-Bolshevik
officers, and reportedly saw it at least 15 times.<sup>10</sup> When
Bulgakov, in a bold letter, pleaded with Stalin for permission to
emigrate, the dictator himself called the author on the
phone.<sup>10</sup> Though he denied the request to leave, Stalin
arranged for Bulgakov to get a job at the Moscow Art
Theatre.<sup>19</sup>

This strange dynamic reveals a crucial aspect of totalitarian power: it
is often arbitrary, personal, and unpredictable, not merely a faceless
bureaucratic machine. Stalin fancied himself the ultimate literary
critic, and his "patronage" was a form of control, keeping a brilliant
but defiant artist on a short leash.<sup>19</sup> This precarious
existence, dependent on the whim of a single, all-powerful figure, is
reflected in the novel's world, where fates are decided not by logic or
law, but by the capricious will of supernatural beings.

## A World in Turmoil: Moscow in the 1930s

To understand *The Master and Margarita*, one must understand the
surreal and terrifying world in which it was born: Stalin's Moscow.

### The Age of "Socialist Realism"

The Soviet Union enforced a rigid artistic doctrine called "Socialist
Realism".<sup>21</sup> Art was not meant to reflect reality but to serve
as propaganda, depicting an idealized future and glorifying the
Communist Party's goals.<sup>11</sup> Writers were considered "employees
of the state".<sup>21</sup> Those who dissented were branded "enemies of
the people".<sup>21</sup> The fictional writers' union in the novel,
MASSOLIT—whose members are more interested in holiday dachas and fine
dining at the Griboedov House than in writing—is a scathing parody of
real-life state literary organizations like the Russian Association of
Proletarian Writers (RAPP).<sup>11</sup> The novel's embrace of fantasy,
religion, and biting satire was a direct and dangerous act of rebellion
against this creative straitjacket.<sup>21</sup>

### The Climate of Fear

Bulgakov wrote his novel during the Great Purge of the 1930s, a period
of intense political repression.<sup>22</sup> Society was riddled with
informants, and the secret police, the NKVD, could make anyone
"disappear" in the middle of the night.<sup>11</sup> The novel subtly
reflects this terror. Characters vanish without explanation, their
apartments instantly coveted by neighbors.<sup>15</sup> Woland's
supernatural antics, which cause officials to be magically teleported
thousands of miles away, serve as a fantastical parallel to the very
real and brutal reality of arrests and internal exile.<sup>11</sup> The
atmosphere of paranoia and the absurdity of daily life under Stalin were
so extreme that the arrival of the Devil and his chaotic retinue often
seems like a logical extension of reality rather than a break from it.

### Atheism as State Policy

The Soviet Union was the first state to have, as an ideological
objective, the elimination of religion.<sup>9</sup> Aggressive atheistic
propaganda was widespread, and the novel opens with a perfect example:
the editor Berlioz lecturing the poet Ivan Bezdomny that Jesus was a
mere myth who never existed.<sup>9</sup> The sudden appearance of
Professor Woland, a foreigner who claims to have had breakfast with the
philosopher Kant and witnessed Pilate's trial firsthand, is a direct,
demonic challenge to the state's enforced materialism.<sup>16</sup>

## The Devil's Details: Symbolism, Allegory, and Hidden Meanings

*The Master and Margarita* is a novel of layers, where almost nothing is
merely what it seems. Its symbols and allegories operate on multiple
levels, some universal and some deeply rooted in its specific cultural
context.

### Key Symbols and Their Cross-Cultural Interpretation

- **Woland's Poodle-Headed Cane:** This is a direct reference to
  Goethe's *Faust*, where the devil Mephistopheles first appears to
  Faust in the form of a black poodle.<sup>3</sup> For readers anywhere
  in the world familiar with this classic, it immediately signals that
  the novel is engaging with the grand European tradition of the
  Faustian bargain.<sup>3</sup>

- **Moonlight:** The moon and its light are a constant presence,
  symbolizing a world of magic, madness, and mystery that exists in
  parallel to the harsh, rational world of Soviet Moscow.<sup>3</sup>
  Moonlight illuminates moments of transition and supernatural truth,
  such as when it reveals the path of forgiveness for Pontius
  Pilate.<sup>3</sup> This symbol has universal mystical associations,
  though it connects particularly strongly to themes of lunacy and
  romance in Western culture.

- **Briefcases:** Many of the petty, cowardly bureaucrats Woland's gang
  torments are identified by their briefcases.<sup>3</sup> This is a
  culturally specific symbol of Soviet officialdom, a visual shorthand
  for a soulless functionary that might not carry the same immediate
  weight for a non-Russian reader.<sup>3</sup>

- **Yellow Flowers:** Margarita carries "unsettling" and "hideous"
  yellow flowers when she first meets the Master. In Russian folk
  tradition, yellow flowers can be a symbol of separation or infidelity,
  foreshadowing the tragic turn their love affair will
  take.<sup>26</sup> This is a powerful cultural code that is almost
  entirely lost in translation without an explanatory note.

### Allegory: Who Represents What?

The novel's allegorical nature is one of its most debated aspects, with
characters open to multiple interpretations.

- **Woland's Role:** Is Woland an allegory for Stalin, a tyrannical
  force that exposes the system's rottenness from within?.<sup>22</sup>
  Or is he a force of cosmic justice, a necessary evil who punishes the
  corrupt and rewards the virtuous in a world where God seems
  absent?.<sup>28</sup> He is both a tempter and a judge, a figure whose
  ambiguity challenges simple moral binaries.

- **The Master as Bulgakov:** The most straightforward allegory is that
  of the Master, the brilliant but broken author, as a stand-in for
  Bulgakov himself—the persecuted artist whose great work is rejected by
  the state but is ultimately immortal.<sup>11</sup>

- **The Pilate Story:** The Master's novel about Pontius Pilate's
  interrogation of Yeshua serves as a historical and philosophical
  allegory for the events in Moscow. Pilate's cowardice in the face of
  political pressure—his failure to save a man he knows is innocent—is
  presented as "the most terrible of vices" and mirrors the moral
  cowardice of the Soviet citizens who fail to stand up to the
  regime.<sup>7</sup>

## Three Worlds, One Story: Intertwining Moscow, Yershalaim, and the Supernatural

The novel's genius lies in its unique structure, which braids together
three seemingly disparate narrative strands.<sup>26</sup>

1.  **The Moscow Satire:** The chaotic, hilarious, and terrifying events
    that unfold in 1930s Moscow when Woland and his demonic
    retinue—including the wisecracking, vodka-swilling, giant black cat
    Behemoth—arrive to hold their spring ball.<sup>11</sup> This
    storyline is a direct, scathing satire of Soviet society's greed,
    bureaucracy, and militant atheism.<sup>15</sup>

2.  **The Yershalaim "Gospel":** The chapters from the Master's novel,
    which offer a starkly realistic and psychologically penetrating
    account of Pontius Pilate, the Roman procurator of Judea, and his
    fateful encounter with the wandering philosopher Yeshua
    Ha-Notsri.<sup>5</sup> This is not a retelling of the biblical
    gospels but a profound meditation on power, truth, and
    cowardice.<sup>16</sup>

3.  **The Supernatural Romance:** The emotional heart of the book is the
    story of the Master and his devoted lover, Margarita.<sup>13</sup>
    Their love is so powerful that Margarita makes a pact with the devil
    and becomes a witch to save the Master, proving that true love is a
    force that can defy both the Soviet state and the laws of reality
    itself.<sup>10</sup>

This complex structure is more than just a clever literary trick; it is
a fundamental act of philosophical rebellion. Soviet ideology insisted
on a single, monolithic, materialist version of reality, enforced by the
state.<sup>21</sup> By weaving together the historical, the
contemporary, and the supernatural, and by deliberately blurring the
lines between them, Bulgakov asserts that reality is
multi-layered.<sup>26</sup> The spiritual, the artistic, and the
satirical are presented as being just as real and valid as the
officially sanctioned world of five-year plans and party meetings. The
very architecture of the novel is a declaration of imaginative freedom
against an oppressive, one-dimensional worldview.

### Philosophical and Religious Dimensions

The novel plunges into deep philosophical and theological waters,
challenging orthodox beliefs of all kinds.

- **Gnosticism and the Nature of Evil:** Many scholars interpret the
  novel through the lens of Gnosticism, an ancient spiritual tradition
  that views the material world as flawed and sees light and darkness
  not as opposing forces in a cosmic war, but as two essential,
  co-dependent parts of a whole.<sup>32</sup> This is perfectly captured
  in Woland's question to the disciple Matthew Levi: "What would your
  good be doing if there were no evil, and what would the earth look
  like if shadows disappeared from it?".<sup>5</sup> In this view,
  Woland is not God's enemy but a necessary part of the cosmic balance,
  managing the realm of shadow.<sup>34</sup>

- **The Faustian Bargain Remade:** Margarita's transformation into a
  witch to host Satan's ball is a clear reference to the Faust
  legend.<sup>12</sup> But Bulgakov brilliantly inverts the theme.
  Unlike Faust, who sells his soul for knowledge and power, Margarita
  enters her pact for a selfless reason: love.<sup>18</sup> Her bargain
  is an act of ultimate devotion, elevating love to the highest of all
  values.

## Voices That Echo: The Quotes That Define the Novel

Certain lines from *The Master and Margarita* have become part of the
cultural lexicon, in Russia and beyond, encapsulating its central
themes.

- "Рукописи не горят" (Manuscripts don't burn)  
  This is the novel's most iconic line, spoken by Woland when the Master
  confesses to burning his novel.7 It is the ultimate statement on the
  indestructibility of art and truth. No matter how regimes try to
  censor, suppress, or destroy creative works, the ideas they contain
  cannot be erased from existence. It has become a rallying cry for
  persecuted artists everywhere.

- "Никогда и ничего не просите!... Сами предложат и сами всё дадут!"
  (Never ask for anything! Never for anything, and especially from those
  who are stronger than you. They'll make the offer themselves, and give
  everything themselves!)  
  Woland's advice to Margarita is a complex statement on power and
  dignity.7 On one level, it is a command to maintain one's pride and
  not to beg from the powerful, who will act according to their own
  whims regardless. On another, it can be read as a cynical observation
  that in a world of absolute power, true agency is an illusion; one can
  only wait for the powerful to bestow their favor.35

- "Да, человек смертен, но это было бы ещё полбеды. Плохо то, что он
  иногда внезапно смертен, вот в чём фокус!" (Yes, man is mortal, but
  that would be only half the trouble. The worst of it is that he's
  sometimes unexpectedly mortal—there's the trick!)  
  With these words in the first chapter, Woland dismisses the arrogant
  certainty of the Soviet bureaucrats who believe they are in control of
  their own destinies.7 It is a chilling and darkly humorous reminder of
  human fragility and the unpredictable nature of fate.

- "Трусость — самый страшный порок" (Cowardice is the most terrible of
  vices)  
  This is the philosophical conclusion of the Pontius Pilate narrative.7
  Pilate is tormented for two thousand years not for his cruelty, but
  for his cowardice—for knowing what was right (freeing Yeshua) and
  failing to do it out of fear for his career and position.36 This theme
  condemns the moral compromises made by ordinary people that allow evil
  regimes to flourish.

## From Samizdat to Bestseller: International Reception and Translation

### The Underground Years

For over 25 years after Bulgakov's death, the novel remained
unpublished. However, it was not entirely unknown. After a heavily
censored version appeared in the magazine *Moskva* in 1966-67, the cut
passages began to circulate secretly through *samizdat*.<sup>9</sup>
This dissident practice involved individuals retyping manuscripts by
hand, often with multiple carbon copies, creating an underground
literary network.<sup>25</sup> This secret life gave the novel a
legendary, forbidden status long before it was officially available.

### The Western Breakthrough

The novel's international journey began when a manuscript was smuggled
to Paris.<sup>9</sup> In 1967, the YMCA Press, a publisher famous for
printing the work of another banned Soviet writer, Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn, published the first-ever book edition.<sup>9</sup> This
event immediately positioned

*The Master and Margarita* as a major literary and political event of
the Cold War, a voice of dissent emerging from behind the Iron Curtain.

### The Translation Race

The international excitement was so intense that two separate English
translations were rushed out in the same year, 1967. Mirra Ginsburg's
version was based on the censored text that had appeared in the *Moskva*
journal.<sup>38</sup> Michael Glenny's translation, however, was based
on a more complete

*samizdat* manuscript, giving the English-speaking world its first
glimpse of the novel's full, uncensored scope.<sup>38</sup> This
near-simultaneous release underscored the West's hunger for this
mysterious masterpiece.

### Reception in Key Regions

The novel's reception varied as it traveled across different cultures,
with each one finding unique points of resonance.

- **France:** As the site of its first publication, France has a special
  connection to the novel. It was quickly recognized as a major
  20th-century work, earning a place on the prestigious *Le Monde's* 100
  Books of the Century list.<sup>9</sup> French theatrical
  interpretations, such as a notable 2000 production at the Avignon
  Festival, have often focused on the novel's psychological and
  political dimensions, particularly the theme of institutional
  confinement.<sup>41</sup>

- **Germany:** The novel's deep engagement with Goethe's *Faust* gives
  it a particular resonance in Germany. One of the earliest adaptations
  was the German television film *Pilatus und andere* (*Pilate and
  Others*, 1972), directed by the renowned Polish filmmaker Andrzej
  Wajda.<sup>42</sup> Strikingly, Wajda's film completely ignored the
  Moscow plot to focus solely on the biblical story, demonstrating how
  different cultural lenses could isolate different aspects of the
  complex narrative.<sup>43</sup> German theatre continues to stage the
  work, drawn to its profound philosophical questions.<sup>44</sup>

- **United Kingdom:** British reception has often highlighted the
  novel's brilliant satire and theatricality. Major stage productions,
  like the technologically innovative 2012 adaptation by the acclaimed
  company Complicite, have been praised for their visual spectacle, even
  as critics noted the immense challenge of capturing the novel's full
  political potency on stage.<sup>46</sup>

- **United States:** In the U.S., the novel is a cornerstone of
  university-level Slavic literature programs.<sup>50</sup> Academic and
  critical focus has often centered on its powerful critique of
  totalitarianism, its complex narrative structure, and its enduring
  philosophical themes.<sup>9</sup>

- **Other Regions:** The novel has been translated into dozens of
  languages, though detailed scholarship on its reception in many
  regions remains sparse. A 2018 Chinese translation was published by
  Lijiang Publishing House <sup>54</sup>, and a stage adaptation in
  Shanghai in 2023 focused on the central love story.<sup>55</sup> In
  Spain, two major translations exist, and scholars have studied how
  Bulgakov's work shaped the Spanish perception of post-revolutionary
  Russia.<sup>56</sup>

## Special Focus: The Polish Soul of a Russian Masterpiece

While *The Master and Margarita* is a global phenomenon, it found a
unique and profound second home in Poland. For Polish readers and
artists, the novel's themes of artistic resistance under an oppressive,
Soviet-backed regime were not abstract historical concepts but a lived
reality. This shared experience created an immediate and deep-seated
affinity for the book, allowing it to become a canonical text in Polish
culture.

### A Shared History, A Deeper Understanding

Poland's long history of struggling for cultural and political
independence, particularly its experience under communist rule following
World War II, gave Polish audiences a special lens through which to view
Bulgakov's work. The biting satire of absurd bureaucracy, the climate of
fear and suspicion, and the defiant struggle of the artist for truth
were all themes that resonated deeply with the Polish experience. Polish
readers did not need extensive footnotes to understand the world
Bulgakov was describing; in many ways, they were already living in it.

### The History of Polish Translations

The journey of *Mistrz i Małgorzata* in Poland is a story of
ever-increasing engagement. The sheer number of re-translations in
recent years points to the novel's vital and evolving place in the
nation's literary life. This "explosion" of new versions has sparked
lively online debates among Polish readers and critics, each arguing the
merits of different translators' choices and
interpretations.<sup>58</sup>

| Year | Translators | Publisher | Basis Text | Key Reception Notes |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| 1969 | Irena Lewandowska & Witold Dąbrowski | Spółdzielnia Wydawnicza "Czytelnik" | Censored Soviet version | The foundational translation that introduced the novel to Poland; considered "canonical" for decades but based on an incomplete text.<sup>59</sup> |
| 1995 | Andrzej Drawicz | Wydawnictwo Dolnośląskie | Uncensored version | A major update aiming for a more modern style; Drawicz was a respected Bulgakov scholar.<sup>61</sup> |
| 2016 | Leokadia, Grzegorz & Igor Przebinda | Znak | Uncensored version | A "family" translation that sparked new critical discussion about translation strategies.<sup>58</sup> |
| 2016 | Krzysztof Tur | Fundacja Sąsiedzi | Uncensored + early drafts | Titled *Mistrz i Małgorzata. Czarny Mag*, this version uniquely includes fragments from Bulgakov's early drafts.<sup>61</sup> |
| 2017 | Jan Cichocki | Bellona | Uncensored version | Part of a wave of 21st-century translations reflecting the book's enduring popularity.<sup>61</sup> |
| 2018 | Barbara Dohnalik | Wydawnictwo MG | Uncensored version | The most recent major translation, continuing the trend of re-interpreting the classic for a new generation of readers.<sup>61</sup> |

### The Polish Stage: A Second Home for the Novel

Poland's role in the novel's history extends far beyond translation. In
a remarkable testament to its early cultural power, Poland became a
creative incubator for the work's theatrical life. From 1971 to 1977,
every single stage adaptation of *The Master and Margarita* in the world
was Polish.<sup>66</sup> This occurred under a communist government,
where directors had to be clever to get the story past the censors. They
were often forbidden from using the original title, instead using names
like

*Czarna magia i jej demaskowanie* (*Black Magic and Its
Exposure*).<sup>66</sup> This intense early engagement cemented a deep
tradition of interpreting the novel on the Polish stage. This legacy was
carried on by some of Poland's most celebrated directors, including
Andrzej Wajda with his 1972 film

*Pilate and Others* and Krystian Lupa, whose monumental 2002 production
at the Stary Teatr in Kraków was a major cultural event.<sup>42</sup>

### In the Classroom: ***Mistrz i Małgorzata*** as Required Reading

The novel's ultimate assimilation into Polish culture is confirmed by
its place in the national education system. *Mistrz i Małgorzata* is a
required text (*lektura*) in Polish high schools and has appeared on the
*Matura*, the comprehensive national exit exam that is crucial for
university admission.<sup>69</sup> On Polish online forums, students
discuss using the novel in their exam essays, for instance, comparing
its vision of a totalitarian state to that of George Orwell's

*1984*.<sup>70</sup> This ensures that every new generation of Polish
youth engages directly with Bulgakov's masterpiece, solidifying its
status as an essential part of their cultural and literary education.

## The Master's Global Legacy: Influence on World Literature and Art

The novel's influence radiates far beyond academic circles, having
inspired some of the most iconic works of modern culture.

### Salman Rushdie's ***The Satanic Verses***

Author Salman Rushdie has explicitly cited *The Master and Margarita* as
a primary inspiration for his own controversial 1988 novel, *The Satanic
Verses*.<sup>20</sup> The parallels are striking. Both novels use
magical realism to explore profound questions of good and evil, faith,
and identity.<sup>72</sup> Both feature central characters who take on
angelic and demonic qualities and interweave a contemporary narrative
with a re-imagining of a foundational religious story (the life of
Christ for Bulgakov, the life of the Prophet Muhammad for
Rushdie).<sup>72</sup> Rushdie also drew a direct parallel between his
own persecution following the

*fatwa* issued against him and Bulgakov's suffering under Stalin,
noting, "It is extraordinary to find my novel's life echoing that of one
of its greatest models".<sup>72</sup>

### The Rolling Stones' "Sympathy for the Devil"

One of the most famous rock songs of all time owes its existence to
Bulgakov's novel. Mick Jagger's then-girlfriend, Marianne Faithfull,
gave him a copy of the book.<sup>73</sup> As she later recalled, "I got
Mick to read 'The Master and Margarita' and out of that... he wrote that
song".<sup>73</sup> The lyrical connections are undeniable. The song's
opening line, "Please allow me to introduce myself / I'm a man of wealth
and taste," directly echoes the polite, formal way Woland introduces
himself to the shocked bureaucrats at Patriarch's Ponds.<sup>73</sup>
The song's narrator goes on to claim he was present for Christ's
crucifixion ("Made damn sure that Pilate / Washed his hands and sealed
his fate") and the Russian Revolution ("Stuck around St. Petersburg /
When I saw it was a time for a change / Killed the Tsar and his
ministers / Anastasia screamed in vain"), mirroring Woland's status as
an eternal, history-shaping witness.<sup>73</sup>

### In Music and Visual Arts

The novel's rich, surreal imagery has been a muse for countless other
artists. It has inspired numerous classical compositions and operas,
with composers drawn to its epic, philosophical, and romantic
themes.<sup>75</sup> Visual artists have created a vast body of work,
from paintings and illustrations to fan art, attempting to capture its
fantastical scenes, from Margarita's flight over Moscow to the demonic
cat Behemoth playing chess.<sup>79</sup>

## The Master and Margarita Today

### From Page to Screen (and Stage): A Universe of Adaptations

The novel's complexity makes it notoriously difficult to adapt, yet
filmmakers and theater directors continue to take on the
challenge.<sup>82</sup>

- **Film:** The history of film adaptations is littered with ambitious
  projects, some more successful than others. Early attempts include
  Aleksandar Petrović's 1972 Yugoslav-Italian co-production and Yuri
  Kara's 1994 Russian film, which was shelved for 17 years due to
  disputes and only released in 2011.<sup>1</sup> The most recent and
  impactful is Michael Lockshin's 2024 film, which became a cultural
  event in Russia for both its artistic merit and its political
  controversy.<sup>2</sup>

- **Television:** The format of a miniseries has allowed for more
  faithful adaptations. The 2005 Russian series directed by Vladimir
  Bortko was a massive success, seen by 40 million viewers, and praised
  for its meticulous adherence to the novel's dialogue.<sup>84</sup>
  However, it was also criticized for omitting some of the book's most
  pointed political critiques, such as a chapter satirizing Soviet show
  trials.<sup>85</sup> A notable 1990 Polish television series by Maciej
  Wojtyszko also brought the story to a wide audience.<sup>82</sup>

- **Theatre:** The novel is a staple of ambitious world theatre, with
  major productions staged in London, Paris, New York, and beyond, each
  offering a unique interpretation of its fantastical and satirical
  elements.<sup>66</sup>

- **Graphic Novels and Audio:** The story has also found life in other
  media. A visually striking graphic novel by Andrzej Klimowski and
  Danusia Schejbal captures the novel's surreal atmosphere.<sup>90</sup>
  Numerous full-cast audio dramas, including several by the BBC, have
  been produced, translating the book's rich dialogue into a purely
  auditory experience.<sup>93</sup>

### The Digital Afterlife: Memes, Fan Art, and TikTok Trends

In the 21st century, the novel has found a vibrant new life online,
connecting with a new generation of fans.

- **TikTok and Instagram:** The novel is making inroads on visual social
  media. Users share fan-made video edits, cosplay of characters like
  Margarita and the demonic Hella, and AI-generated art inspired by its
  scenes.<sup>95</sup> A 2024 ice skating performance set to a "Master
  and Margarita" theme even went viral after winning an audience choice
  award at a Russian competition, introducing the story to a new
  audience through a completely different medium.<sup>96</sup>

- **Fan Communities:** Dedicated online spaces thrive on platforms like
  Reddit, DeviantArt, and ArtStation. Here, fans engage in deep analysis
  of the book's themes, share incredibly detailed fan art, and even
  create crossover projects, like a "spoof adaptation" blending the
  novel's characters with the universe of the popular animated series
  *Hazbin Hotel*.<sup>97</sup>

- **YouTube and Podcasts:** A rich ecosystem of digital content helps
  new readers access the novel. Video essays on YouTube break down its
  complex symbolism, "BookTube" reviewers share their reading
  experiences, and podcasts like *Book Cheat* and the BBC's *The Forum*
  dedicate episodes to exploring its history and meaning, making
  high-level literary criticism more accessible than ever.<sup>94</sup>

### Why It Still Matters: Contemporary Relevance for a New Generation

Beyond its historical and political significance, *The Master and
Margarita* continues to resonate with young readers today because its
core themes are universal and timeless.

- **Rebellion and Authenticity:** The Master's refusal to compromise his
  artistic vision, even when it leads to his ruin, is a powerful story
  about the importance of being true to oneself in a world that demands
  conformity.<sup>3</sup> His struggle speaks to anyone who has ever
  felt pressured to abandon their passions for more practical or
  "acceptable" pursuits.

- **Love and Sacrifice:** Margarita's epic quest to save the Master is
  one of literature's great love stories. Her willingness to face down
  the devil himself for the person she loves is a profound, if
  fantastical, exploration of loyalty, devotion, and the idea that love
  requires courage and sacrifice.<sup>3</sup>

- **Mental Health:** The novel's portrayal of the Master's breakdown and
  Ivan's journey through a psychiatric clinic can be read as a powerful
  commentary on the psychological cost of living in an oppressive,
  gaslighting society.<sup>11</sup> It explores how a world built on
  lies and fear can make a sane person feel like they are going mad.

- **Modern Parallels:** The novel's satire of Soviet life feels
  remarkably current. The spread of official lies and propaganda is a
  direct parallel to modern concerns about "fake news" and
  disinformation.<sup>5</sup> The absurdities of the MASSOLIT
  bureaucracy and the moral compromises characters make for a
  comfortable apartment or a better job are timeless critiques of how
  systems can corrupt individuals.<sup>103</sup>

## How to Spot Good Sources (A Student's Guide)

When you're exploring a book as deep and complex as this one, using
reliable sources is key to understanding it better and acing your school
assignments. Here’s a quick guide to navigating the information jungle.

### 🟢 Trust these sources:

- **University websites and publications (.edu,.ac.uk,.edu.pl):** These
  are home to academic experts. Look for papers, articles, and course
  syllabi from literature departments.<sup>50</sup>

- **Peer-reviewed journals:** These are articles written by scholars and
  vetted by other experts before publication. Databases like JSTOR,
  Project MUSE, or university library portals are the best places to
  find them.<sup>32</sup>

- **Published academic books with an ISBN:** Books from university
  presses (like Cambridge University Press, Oxford University Press) or
  reputable academic publishers are thoroughly researched and
  edited.<sup>63</sup>

- **Major museums and cultural institutions:** Official museum websites,
  like that of the Bulgakov Museum in Moscow, provide verified
  biographical and historical information.<sup>105</sup>

- **Established newspapers and magazines with fact-checking:** Outlets
  like *The New York Times*, *The Guardian*, or literary magazines like
  *Literary Hub* have editorial standards.<sup>1</sup>

- **Polish trusted sources:** Websites like Culture.pl, the Instytut
  Książki (Book Institute), and Polish university repositories (e.g.,
  ojs.tnkul.pl) offer high-quality, verified information on Polish
  culture and literature.<sup>67</sup>

### 🟡 Use with caution:

- **Wikipedia:** It's a great starting point to get an overview and find
  sources, but never cite it directly in an academic paper. Always check
  the sources listed at the bottom of the page to verify the
  information.<sup>9</sup>

- **Popular blogs and fan sites:** Some are excellent and run by
  dedicated experts (like the masterandmargarita.eu website), but many
  are just opinion pieces. Verify their claims with more established
  sources.<sup>73</sup>

- **YouTube videos:** A video essay by a literature professor is great.
  A random video with no sources is not. Check the creator's credentials
  and whether they cite their information.<sup>101</sup>

- **Polish sources:** User-review sites like Lubimyczytać.pl can give
  you a sense of popular opinion, but they aren't academic sources.
  Student forums can be helpful but may contain errors.<sup>65</sup>

### 🔴 Avoid these:

- **Anonymous posts without sources:** Forum comments or social media
  posts with no backing are unreliable.

- **Clickbait sites with lots of ads:** These are usually designed to
  get clicks, not to provide accurate information.

- **Student essay-sharing sites (e.g., Bryka.pl in Poland):** These
  often contain factual errors, oversimplifications, and are a major
  source of plagiarism.

- **AI-generated content without human verification:** AI can be a
  useful tool, but it can also "hallucinate" or make up facts and
  sources. Always double-check its claims with trusted sources.

**Pro tip:** If a fact sounds too wild to be true, try to find at least
two or three different reliable sources that confirm it. This is called
triangulation, and it's what professional researchers and journalists
do.

## Further Research and Unanswered Questions

While the research on *The Master and Margarita* is extensive, there are
still areas ripe for further exploration, particularly from an
international perspective.

- **Non-Western Reception:** Detailed, academic analysis of the novel's
  reception and influence in Japan, China, India, the Middle East, and
  Latin America is limited. Understanding how these cultures, with their
  own distinct literary and philosophical traditions, interpret the
  novel's themes would provide a truly global picture.

- **Quantitative Educational Data:** While we know the novel is taught
  in Poland and Russia, precise data on its inclusion in school
  curricula worldwide (e.g., at what grade levels, mandatory vs.
  optional status) is not readily available.

- **Identity-Based Readings:** There is a notable lack of in-depth
  academic scholarship on LGBTQ+ readings of the novel. While some
  sources touch on feminist interpretations of Margarita <sup>107</sup>,
  deeper analysis from various identity perspectives remains an open
  field.

- **Video Game Adaptations:** Despite its rich world and characters, no
  reliable sources were found detailing any video game or interactive
  storytelling adaptations of the novel, which seems like a missed
  opportunity and an area for future creative development.<sup>82</sup>

## Bibliography

### A. Primary Sources

1.  Bulgakov, Mikhail. *The Master and Margarita*. Translated by Michael
    Glenny, Collins and Harvill Press, 1967. <sup>110</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

2.  Bulgakov, Mikhail. *The Master and Margarita*. Translated by Mirra
    Ginsburg, Grove Press, 1967. <sup>38</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

3.  Bulgakov, Mikhail. *The Master and Margarita*. Translated by Diana
    Burgin and Katherine Tiernan O'Connor, Ardis, 1993. <sup>39</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

4.  Bulgakov, Mikhail. *The Master and Margarita*. Translated by Richard
    Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky, Penguin Classics, 1997.
    <sup>39</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

5.  Bulgakov, Mikhail. *Mistrz i Małgorzata*. Translated by Irena
    Lewandowska and Witold Dąbrowski, Czytelnik, 1969.
    \[Polish\]<sup>59</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

6.  Bulgakov, Mikhail. *Mistrz i Małgorzata*. Translated by Andrzej
    Drawicz, Wydawnictwo Dolnośląskie, 1995. \[Polish\]<sup>61</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

7.  Bulgakov, Mikhail. *Mistrz i Małgorzata*. Translated by Leokadia
    Anna Przebinda, Grzegorz Przebinda, and Igor Przebinda, Znak, 2016.
    \[Polish\]<sup>61</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

8.  Bulgakov, Mikhail. *Mistrz i Małgorzata. Czarny Mag*. Translated by
    Krzysztof Tur, Fundacja Sąsiedzi, 2016. \[Polish\]<sup>61</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

9.  Shentalinsky, Vitaly. *Arrested Voices: Resurrecting the Disappeared
    Writers of the Soviet Regime*. Free Press, 1996. (Contains materials
    from KGB archives on Bulgakov).<sup>112</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

### B. Secondary Sources (Organized by Language)

#### Polish Sources

10. Drawicz, Andrzej. *The Master and the Devil: A Study of Mikhail
    Bulgakov*. Translated by Kevin Windle, Edwin Mellen Press, 2001.
    <sup>63</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

11. Mocarz-Kleindienst, Maria. "Why do new translations come into being?
    Mikhail Bulgakov’s The Master and Margarita in a new Polish
    translation." *ResearchGate*, 2018. \[Polish\]<sup>58</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

12. Rozwadowska, Kinga. "Translation Criticism in Cyberspace – New
    Opportunities and Challenges (on Polish Translations of Mikhail
    Bulgakov’s The Master and Margarita)." *Przekładaniec: A Journal of
    Translation Studies*, 2019. \[Polish\]<sup>58</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

13. Squillace, Caterina. "The Semiosic Character of a Literary Work and
    the Role of the Translator as a Mediator. Some Remarks on the Polish
    and Italian Translations of The Master and Margarita by Mikhail
    Bulgakov." *Journal of Translation Studies*, Jagiellonian
    University, 2021. <sup>37</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

14. Witowicz, Bożena. "Narzan, zubrik i pepegi. Co wyczytali tłumacze w
    najnowszych przekładach Mistrza i Małgorzaty." *Przegląd*, 2017.
    \[Polish\]<sup>62</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

15. "Spiritual Motives and Motivations in Mikhail Bulgakov's The Master
    and Margarita in Polish Periodical and Non-Serial Sources Since
    1989." *Roczniki Humanistyczne*, Vol. 69, No. 1, 2021.
    <sup>104</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

16. "Mistrz i Małgorzata w tłumaczeniach." *Skrivanek.pl*, 26 Oct. 2023,
    skrivanek.pl/mistrz-i-malgorzata-w-tlumaczeniach/. <sup>61</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

17. "Michaił Bułhakow - Mistrz I Małgorzata. Pierwsze polskie wydanie
    dzieła z 1969r." *Antyk Sobieski*, 5 Jul. 2023,
    antyksobieski.pl/blog/michail-bulhakow-mistrz-i-malgorzata-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie-dziela-z-1969r-w-ekskluzywnej-skorzanej-oprawie.
    <sup>59</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

18. "The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov." *OneBid*, 22 Mar.
    2024,
    one.bid/en/knihy-a-stare-tisky-mistr-a-margarita-by-michail-bulgakov-prvni-polske-vydani-nike-1969/2170129.
    <sup>111</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

#### English Sources

19. Balasubramanian, Radha. "The Similarities Between Mikahil Bulgakov's
    The Master and Margarita and Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses."
    *DigitalCommons@UNL*, 1993. <sup>72</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

20. Belyk, Kristina. "The Master and Margarita: Deconstructing Social
    Realism." *Brightonline*, Issue 3, University of Brighton.
    <sup>21</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

21. Benedetti, A. "The Reception of Western Literature in Stalin's
    Russia: Dante Alighieri's 'Divine Comedy' and Mikhail Bulgakov's
    'The Master and Margarita'." PhD Thesis, The University of
    Manchester, 2022. <sup>114</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

22. Blake, Barbara. "Elements of Satire and the Grotesque in the Prose
    of M.A. Bulgakov." MA Thesis, McGill University, 1968.
    <sup>115</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

23. Curtis, J.A.E. *Bulgakov's Last Decade: The Writer as Hero*.
    Cambridge University Press, 1987. <sup>32</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

24. Gurevich, Olga. "The Three Worlds of 'The Master and Margarita'."
    *Duke University Slavic Centers*, 2003. <sup>26</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

25. Haber, Edythe C. *Mikhail Bulgakov: The Early Years*. Harvard
    University Press, 1998. <sup>94</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

26. Kondoyanidi, Anita. "Mikhail Bulgakov and Salman Rushdie:
    Similarities and Differences between The Master and Margarita and
    The Satanic Verses." *AATSEEL Conference Abstract*, 2004.
    <sup>116</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

27. Leshcheva, Olga. "Rediscovering The Master and Margarita: from
    Creation to Adaptation." MA Thesis, University of Alberta, 2013.
    <sup>117</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

28. Schofield, Judith. "Reading The Master and Margarita by Mikhail
    Bulgakov as Fantastic Literature." *Beyond the Anglocentric
    Fantastic*, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022. <sup>119</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

29. Sokolov, B.V. "Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita: A Critical
    Companion." Edited by Laura D. Weeks, Northwestern University
    Press, 1996. <sup>121</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

30. Wright, A.C. "Satan in Moscow: An Approach to Bulgakov's The Master
    and Margarita." *PMLA*, Vol. 88, No. 5, 1973, pp. 1162-1172.
    <sup>34</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

31. "The Master and Margarita." *Britannica*,
    [<u>www.britannica.com/topic/The-Master-and-Margarita</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Master-and-Margarita).
    Accessed 10 Oct. 2024. <sup>10</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

32. "The Master and Margarita." *Wikipedia*,
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita. Accessed 10
    Oct. 2024. <sup>9</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

33. "The Master and Margarita Symbols." *LitCharts*,
    [<u>www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita/symbols</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita/symbols).
    Accessed 10 Oct. 2024. <sup>3</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

34. "Stalin's Russia and a Censored Book: The Master and Margarita."
    *Release Peace*, 15 Nov. 2022,
    releasepeace.org/stalins-russia-and-a-censored-book-the-master-and-margarita/.
    <sup>11</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

35. "Mikhail Bulgakov, Master and Margarita, and Truth in the USSR."
    *Museum Studies Abroad*, 20 Nov. 2019,
    museumstudiesabroad.org/bulgakov-master-margarita-ussr/.
    <sup>25</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

36. "In the Face of Constant Censorship, Bulgakov Kept Writing."
    *Literary Hub*, 25 Oct. 2018,
    [<u>lithub.com/in-the-face-of-constant-censorship-bulgakov-kept-writing/</u>](https://lithub.com/in-the-face-of-constant-censorship-bulgakov-kept-writing/).
    <sup>12</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

37. "Why a New Adaptation of The Master and Margarita is Setting Russian
    Society Aflame." *Literary Hub*, 20 Feb. 2024,
    [<u>lithub.com/why-a-new-adaptation-of-the-master-and-margarita-is-setting-russian-society-aflame/</u>](https://lithub.com/why-a-new-adaptation-of-the-master-and-margarita-is-setting-russian-society-aflame/).
    <sup>1</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

38. "The Master and Margarita (2024 film)." *Wikipedia*,
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita\_(2024_film).
    Accessed 10 Oct. 2024. <sup>2</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

39. "The Master and Margarita (miniseries)." *Wikipedia*,
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita\_(miniseries).
    Accessed 10 Oct. 2024. <sup>85</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

40. "Pilate and Others." *Wikipedia*,
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilate_and_Others. Accessed 10 Oct. 2024.
    <sup>42</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

41. Vanhellemont, Jan. *The Master and Margarita website*.
    www.masterandmargarita.eu. Accessed 10 Oct. 2024. (A comprehensive
    fan-run but well-researched resource). <sup>43</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Chinese Sources

42. "Bulgakov's masterpiece 'The Master and Margarita' comes alive on
    stage." *Shanghai Municipal People's Government*, 4 Aug. 2023,
    service.shanghai.gov.cn/sheninfo/specialdetail.aspx?Id=2cf7d937-9252-47a3-b6b9-84525d9a609e.
    <sup>55</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

43. "The influence of M. A. Bulgakov's novel 'The Master and Margarita'
    to Yu Hua's novel 'Brothers'." *ResearchGate*, Jun. 2024.
    \[Chinese\]<sup>124</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Spanish Sources

44. Mychko-Megrin, Irina. "Recepción de la literatura rusa soviética en
    España: El maestro y Margarita y otras obras de Mijail Bulgakov."
    *ResearchGate*, Jan. 2010.<sup>56</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

45. "Everyday culture in the original novel and its translation (based
    on the translations of 'The Master and Margarita' novel by Mikhail
    Bulgakov into Spanish)." *Cyberleninka*, 2018. <sup>57</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Multimedia Sources

46. Lockshin, Michael, director. *The Master and Margarita*. Mars Media
    Entertainment, 2024. \[Film\]<sup>2</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

47. Bortko, Vladimir, director. *Master i Margarita*. Telekanal Rossiya,
    2005.<sup>85</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

48. Wajda, Andrzej, director. *Pilatus und andere - Ein Film für
    Karfreitag*. ZDF, 1972.<sup>42</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

49. The Rolling Stones. "Sympathy For The Devil." *Beggars Banquet*,
    Decca Records, 1968.<sup>73</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

50. "Devilish Satire." *The Forum*, BBC World Service, 3 Jan.
    2019.<sup>94</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

51. "97 - The Master and Margarita (with Sam Petersen and Stephen
    Hall)." *Book Cheat*, Acast, 4 Dec. 2023. \[Podcast\]<sup>99</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

52. "The Master, Margarita and the Artist." *Pushkin House Podcast*,
    Everand. \[Podcast\]<sup>100</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

53. @torys_mom. "Vasilisa and Maxim performing 'Master and Margarita' ⛸️
    They WON Audience..." *TikTok*, 10 Mar. 2024,
    [<u>www.tiktok.com/@torys_mom/video/7344700087693561090</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@torys_mom/video/7344700087693561090).
    <sup>96</sup> ⭐⭐

54. @rawbeannn. "Omg my first time seeing The Master and Margarita on
    tiktok!!! Great taste." *TikTok*, 21 Mar. 2024,
    [<u>www.tiktok.com/@rawbeannn/video/7348689123277917486</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@rawbeannn/video/7348689123277917486).
    <sup>95</sup> ⭐⭐

#### Cytowane prace

1.  Why a New Adaptation of The Master and Margarita is Setting Russian
    Society Aflame, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lithub.com/why-a-new-adaptation-of-the-master-and-margarita-is-setting-russian-society-aflame/</u>](https://lithub.com/why-a-new-adaptation-of-the-master-and-margarita-is-setting-russian-society-aflame/)

2.  The Master and Margarita (2024 film) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita\_(2024_film)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita_(2024_film))

3.  The Master and Margarita Symbols \| LitCharts, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita/symbols</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita/symbols)

4.  The Master and Margarita Themes - LitCharts, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita/themes</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita/themes)

5.  The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov \| Book Review - the
    exiled soul library, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://theexiledsoul.com/2020/02/02/book-review-the-master-and-margarita-by-mikhail-bulgakov/</u>](https://theexiledsoul.com/2020/02/02/book-review-the-master-and-margarita-by-mikhail-bulgakov/)

6.  Satirical Art of “The Master and Margarita” \| UAB Blazer Media,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://uabblazermedia.com/2023/08/satirical-art-of-the-master-and-margarita/</u>](https://uabblazermedia.com/2023/08/satirical-art-of-the-master-and-margarita/)

7.  Mikhail Bulgakov - Wikiquote, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Mikhail_Bulgakov</u>](https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Mikhail_Bulgakov)

8.  Рукописи не горят - Russian Language Stack Exchange, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://russian.stackexchange.com/questions/8608/%D0%A0%D1%83%D0%BA%D0%BE%D0%BF%D0%B8%D1%81%D0%B8-%D0%BD%D0%B5-%D0%B3%D0%BE%D1%80%D1%8F%D1%82</u>](https://russian.stackexchange.com/questions/8608/%D0%A0%D1%83%D0%BA%D0%BE%D0%BF%D0%B8%D1%81%D0%B8-%D0%BD%D0%B5-%D0%B3%D0%BE%D1%80%D1%8F%D1%82)

9.  The Master and Margarita - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita)

10. The Master and Margarita \| Plot, Characters, & Facts - Britannica,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Master-and-Margarita</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Master-and-Margarita)

11. Stalin's Russia and a Censored Book: The Master and Margarita -
    Release Peace, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://releasepeace.org/stalins-russia-and-a-censored-book-the-master-and-margarita/</u>](https://releasepeace.org/stalins-russia-and-a-censored-book-the-master-and-margarita/)

12. In the Face of Constant Censorship, Bulgakov Kept Writing - Literary
    Hub, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lithub.com/in-the-face-of-constant-censorship-bulgakov-kept-writing/</u>](https://lithub.com/in-the-face-of-constant-censorship-bulgakov-kept-writing/)

13. Book Review: The Master and Margarita (1940/1967) by Mikhail
    Bulgakov, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://potpourri2015.wordpress.com/2024/06/25/book-review-the-master-and-margarita-1940-1967-by-mikhail-bulgakov/</u>](https://potpourri2015.wordpress.com/2024/06/25/book-review-the-master-and-margarita-1940-1967-by-mikhail-bulgakov/)

14. Ivan Splits In Two - The Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/app/en/annotations11.html</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/app/en/annotations11.html)

15. The Danger and Absurdity of Soviet Society Theme in The Master ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita/themes/the-danger-and-absurdity-of-soviet-society</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita/themes/the-danger-and-absurdity-of-soviet-society)

16. Revisiting a Classic: The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov -
    VoegelinView, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://voegelinview.com/revisiting-a-classic-the-master-and-margarita-by-mikhail-bulgakov/</u>](https://voegelinview.com/revisiting-a-classic-the-master-and-margarita-by-mikhail-bulgakov/)

17. Please weigh in on The Master and Margarita : r/literature - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/1is7irk/please_weigh_in_on_the_master_and_margarita/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/1is7irk/please_weigh_in_on_the_master_and_margarita/)

18. What is the plot of Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov? -
    Quora, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-plot-of-Master-and-Margarita-by-Mikhail-Bulgakov</u>](https://www.quora.com/What-is-the-plot-of-Master-and-Margarita-by-Mikhail-Bulgakov)

19. Bulgakov's Unique Relationship with Stalin - UFDC Image Array 2,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ufdcimages.uflib.ufl.edu/AA/00/06/00/06/00001/adachal-Thesis_complete.pdf</u>](https://ufdcimages.uflib.ufl.edu/AA/00/06/00/06/00001/adachal-Thesis_complete.pdf)

20. Mikhail Bulgakov - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikhail_Bulgakov</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikhail_Bulgakov)

21. The Master and Margarita: Deconstructing Social Realism - University
    of Brighton, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://arts.brighton.ac.uk/projects/brightonline/issue-number-three/the-master-and-margarita-deconstructing-social-realism</u>](http://arts.brighton.ac.uk/projects/brightonline/issue-number-three/the-master-and-margarita-deconstructing-social-realism)

22. An Analysis - The Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen008_undergraduate.pdf</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen008_undergraduate.pdf)

23. NKVD - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NKVD</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NKVD)

24. The Master and the Margarita (Spoilers up to Chapter One) :
    r/ClassicBookClub - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/ClassicBookClub/comments/10702oz/the_master_and_the_margarita_spoilers_up_to/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/ClassicBookClub/comments/10702oz/the_master_and_the_margarita_spoilers_up_to/)

25. Mikhail Bulgakov, Master and Margarita, and Truth in the USSR. -
    Museum Studies Abroad, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://museumstudiesabroad.org/bulgakov-master-margarita-ussr/</u>](https://museumstudiesabroad.org/bulgakov-master-margarita-ussr/)

26. Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita: Why Can't Critics Agree on What
    It Means?1 - Duke University, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://slaviccenters.duke.edu/sites/slaviccenters.duke.edu/files/media_items_files/4gurevich.original.pdf</u>](https://slaviccenters.duke.edu/sites/slaviccenters.duke.edu/files/media_items_files/4gurevich.original.pdf)

27. The Truth About Lies: The Master and Margarita - Jim Murdoch,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://jim-murdoch.blogspot.com/2009/10/master-and-margarita.html</u>](http://jim-murdoch.blogspot.com/2009/10/master-and-margarita.html)

28. Mythic and Daimonic Paradigms in Bulgakov's Master i Margarita Carol
    Arenberg, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/archieven/mythicparadigms.pdf</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/archieven/mythicparadigms.pdf)

29. The Master and Margarita: A Carnival of the Absurd \| by Harry
    Readhead - Medium, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://guiltandindustry.medium.com/the-master-and-margarita-a-carnival-of-the-absurd-a6e8334327b8</u>](https://guiltandindustry.medium.com/the-master-and-margarita-a-carnival-of-the-absurd-a6e8334327b8)

30. emen006_enotes.pdf - The Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen006_enotes.pdf</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen006_enotes.pdf)

31. Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita Why Can't Critics Agree on What
    It Means?1 Olga Gurevich, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen023_gurevich.pdf</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen023_gurevich.pdf)

32. An Interpretation of the Occult Symbolism in Mikhail Bulgakov's The
    Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/249846078_An_Interpretation_of_the_Occult_Symbolism_in_Mikhail_Bulgakov's_The_Master_and_Margarita</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/249846078_An_Interpretation_of_the_Occult_Symbolism_in_Mikhail_Bulgakov's_The_Master_and_Margarita)

33. an interpretation of the occult symbolism in mikhail bulgakov's the
    master and margarita, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1179/136174205x60465</u>](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1179/136174205x60465)

34. Master and Margarita \| PDF \| Mary Magdalene \| Gnosticism -
    Scribd, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.scribd.com/document/206248233/Master-And-Margarita</u>](https://www.scribd.com/document/206248233/Master-And-Margarita)

35. Meaning of the quote from Bulgakov "The Master and Margarita" :
    r/books - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/p8295z/meaning_of_the_quote_from_bulgakov_the_master_and/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/p8295z/meaning_of_the_quote_from_bulgakov_the_master_and/)

36. TOP 25 QUOTES BY MIKHAIL BULGAKOV (of 77) \| A-Z Quotes, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.azquotes.com/author/2145-Mikhail_Bulgakov</u>](https://www.azquotes.com/author/2145-Mikhail_Bulgakov)

37. An article from www.europeanjournalofhumour.org - Półrocznik
    Językoznawczy Tertium, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://journal.tertium.edu.pl/JaK/article/download/202/301</u>](https://journal.tertium.edu.pl/JaK/article/download/202/301)

38. 60 YEARS OF CLASSIC TRANSLATIONS: The Master and Margarita (1967),
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://glli-us.org/2018/06/20/translators-association-60-years-of-classic-translations-the-master-and-margarita-1967/</u>](https://glli-us.org/2018/06/20/translators-association-60-years-of-classic-translations-the-master-and-margarita-1967/)

39. What's the best translation of The Master and Margarita?, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://welovetranslations.com/2022/10/31/whats-the-best-translation-of-the-master-and-margarita/</u>](https://welovetranslations.com/2022/10/31/whats-the-best-translation-of-the-master-and-margarita/)

40. Book Announcement: Join us as we read The Master and Margarita by
    Mikhail Bulgakov beginning on January 9th : r/ClassicBookClub -
    Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/ClassicBookClub/comments/zwgvie/book_announcement_join_us_as_we_read_the_master/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/ClassicBookClub/comments/zwgvie/book_announcement_join_us_as_we_read_the_master/)

41. Le Maître et Marguerite (Master and Margarita) \| Festival
    d'Avignon, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://festival-avignon.com/en/edition-2000/programme/le-maitre-et-marguerite-master-and-margarita-30368</u>](https://festival-avignon.com/en/edition-2000/programme/le-maitre-et-marguerite-master-and-margarita-30368)

42. Pilate and Others - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilate_and_Others</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilate_and_Others)

43. Films and TV series - History - The Master and Margarita, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/05media/filmgeschiedenis.html</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/05media/filmgeschiedenis.html)

44. biletkartina.tv, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://biletkartina.tv/en/event/Master_i_Margarita_v_Germanii#:~:text=The%20play%20%22The%20Master%20and%20Margarita%22%20in%20Germany&text=are%20no%20barriers.-,It%20is%20a%20search%20for%20answers%20to%20eternal%20philosophical%20questions,the%20influence%20of%20higher%20forces%3F</u>](https://biletkartina.tv/en/event/Master_i_Margarita_v_Germanii#:~:text=The%20play%20%22The%20Master%20and%20Margarita%22%20in%20Germany&text=are%20no%20barriers.-,It%20is%20a%20search%20for%20answers%20to%20eternal%20philosophical%20questions,the%20influence%20of%20higher%20forces%3F)

45. "The Master and Margarita" in Germany - BiletKartina.TV, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://biletkartina.tv/en/event/Master_i_Margarita_v_Germanii</u>](https://biletkartina.tv/en/event/Master_i_Margarita_v_Germanii)

46. The Master and Margarita, Barbican, London Sweeney Todd, Adelphi,
    London Filumena, Almedia, London \| The Independent, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/reviews/the-master-and-margarita-barbican-london-sweeney-todd-adelphi-london-filumena-almedia-london-7584353.html</u>](https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/reviews/the-master-and-margarita-barbican-london-sweeney-todd-adelphi-london-filumena-almedia-london-7584353.html)

47. The Master and Margarita – Exeunt Magazine, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://exeuntmagazine.com/reviews/master-and-margarita/</u>](https://exeuntmagazine.com/reviews/master-and-margarita/)

48. civiliantheatre.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://civiliantheatre.com/reviews/2012-2/the-master-and-margarita/#:~:text=Complicite's%20version%20of%20The%20Master,the%20production%20as%20a%20whole.</u>](https://civiliantheatre.com/reviews/2012-2/the-master-and-margarita/#:~:text=Complicite's%20version%20of%20The%20Master,the%20production%20as%20a%20whole.)

49. REVIEW: The Master and Margarita - Complicite / Simon McBurney ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lookingfordrama.com/2012/07/review-the-master-and-margarita-complicite-simon-mcburney/</u>](https://lookingfordrama.com/2012/07/review-the-master-and-margarita-complicite-simon-mcburney/)

50. Open Course "The Master and Margarita" - Trinity Today, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.trincoll.edu/trinitytoday/announcements/the-russian-department-is-offering-a-course-titled-the-master-and-margarita/</u>](https://www.trincoll.edu/trinitytoday/announcements/the-russian-department-is-offering-a-course-titled-the-master-and-margarita/)

51. The Master & Margarita « Three Percent - University of Rochester,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.rochester.edu/College/translation/threepercent/2007/09/12/the-master-margarita/</u>](https://www.rochester.edu/College/translation/threepercent/2007/09/12/the-master-margarita/)

52. The Master and Margarita Study Guide - Mikhail Bulgakov - LitCharts,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-master-and-margarita)

53. The Master and Margarita: Analysis of Major Characters \| EBSCO ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/master-and-margarita-analysis-major-characters</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/master-and-margarita-analysis-major-characters)

54. The Master and Margarita (Chinese Edition) - Mikhail Bulgakov -
    AbeBooks, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.abebooks.com/9787540785222/Master-Margarita-Chinese-Edition-Mikhail-7540785225/plp</u>](https://www.abebooks.com/9787540785222/Master-Margarita-Chinese-Edition-Mikhail-7540785225/plp)

55. Bulgakov's masterpiece 'The Master and Margarita' comes alive on
    stage - SHANGHAI CHINA, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://service.shanghai.gov.cn/sheninfo/specialdetail.aspx?Id=2cf7d937-9252-47a3-b6b9-84525d9a609e</u>](http://service.shanghai.gov.cn/sheninfo/specialdetail.aspx?Id=2cf7d937-9252-47a3-b6b9-84525d9a609e)

56. Recepción de la literatura rusa soviética en España: El maestro y
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/47442912_Recepcion_de_la_literatura_rusa_sovietica_en_Espana_El_maestro_y_Margarita_y_otras_obras_de_Mijail_Bulgakov</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/47442912_Recepcion_de_la_literatura_rusa_sovietica_en_Espana_El_maestro_y_Margarita_y_otras_obras_de_Mijail_Bulgakov)

57. Everyday culture in the original novel and its translation (based on
    the translations of the Master and Margarita novel by Mikhail
    Bulgakov into the Spanish language) - КиберЛенинка, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/everyday-culture-in-the-original-novel-and-its-translation-based-on-the-translations-of-the-master-and-margarita-novel-by-mikhail-bulgakov</u>](https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/everyday-culture-in-the-original-novel-and-its-translation-based-on-the-translations-of-the-master-and-margarita-novel-by-mikhail-bulgakov)

58. Three Translations of the Master and Margarita \| Request PDF -
    ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261658389_Three_Translations_of_the_Master_and_Margarita</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/261658389_Three_Translations_of_the_Master_and_Margarita)

59. Michaił Bułhakow - Mistrz I Małgorzata. Pierwsze polskie wydanie
    dzieła z 1969r. w ekskluzywnej skórzanej oprawie. - Sobieski.
    Antykwariat, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://antyksobieski.pl/blog/michail-bulhakow-mistrz-i-malgorzata-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie-dziela-z-1969r-w-ekskluzywnej-skorzanej-oprawie</u>](https://antyksobieski.pl/blog/michail-bulhakow-mistrz-i-malgorzata-pierwsze-polskie-wydanie-dziela-z-1969r-w-ekskluzywnej-skorzanej-oprawie)

60. Mikhail Bulgakov - Master And Margarita. Mistrz i Malgorzata. First
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://antyksobieski.pl/blog/en/mikhail-bulgakov-master-and-margarita-first-polish-edition-of-works-from-1969-in-natural-leather-binding</u>](https://antyksobieski.pl/blog/en/mikhail-bulgakov-master-and-margarita-first-polish-edition-of-works-from-1969-in-natural-leather-binding)

61. Mistrz i Małgorzata w tłumaczeniach - Skrivanek, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://skrivanek.pl/mistrz-i-malgorzata-w-tlumaczeniach/</u>](https://skrivanek.pl/mistrz-i-malgorzata-w-tlumaczeniach/)

62. Co wyczytali tłumacze w najnowszych przekładach „Mistrza i
    Małgorzaty”, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://stl.org.pl/co-wyczytali-tlumacze-w-najnowszych-przekladach-mistrza-i-malgorzaty/</u>](https://stl.org.pl/co-wyczytali-tlumacze-w-najnowszych-przekladach-mistrza-i-malgorzaty/)

63. The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov \| EBSCO Research
    Starters, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/master-and-margarita-mikhail-bulgakov</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/master-and-margarita-mikhail-bulgakov)

64. Translation of Andrzej Drawicz's the Master and the Devil: A Study
    of Mikhail Bulgakov, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://mellenpress.com/book/Translation-of-Andrzej-Drawiczs-the-Master-and-the-Devil-A-Study-of-Mikhail-Bulgakov/567/</u>](https://mellenpress.com/book/Translation-of-Andrzej-Drawiczs-the-Master-and-the-Devil-A-Study-of-Mikhail-Bulgakov/567/)

65. Mistrz i Małgorzata. Czarny mag. - Michaił Bułhakow \| Książka w
    Lubimyczytac.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/4666947/mistrz-i-malgorzata-czarny-mag</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/4666947/mistrz-i-malgorzata-czarny-mag)

66. The Master and Margarita - The History of Creativity, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.historyofcreativity.com/wid254/the-master-and-margarita</u>](https://www.historyofcreativity.com/wid254/the-master-and-margarita)

67. The Master and Margarita – Krystian Lupa \| \#performing arts -
    Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/work/the-master-and-margarita-krystian-lupa</u>](https://culture.pl/en/work/the-master-and-margarita-krystian-lupa)

68. The Master and Margarita (Mistrz i Malgorzata) - Odéon - Théâtre de
    l'Europe, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.theatre-odeon.eu/en/the-master-and-margarita-mistrz-i-malgorzata</u>](https://www.theatre-odeon.eu/en/the-master-and-margarita-mistrz-i-malgorzata)

69. Let's talk The Master and Margarita : r/literature - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/1aqblhj/lets_talk_the_master_and_margarita/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/1aqblhj/lets_talk_the_master_and_margarita/)

70. Matura exam in Polish : r/Polska - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/Polska/comments/1kf8ofc/matura_z_polskiego/?tl=en</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/Polska/comments/1kf8ofc/matura_z_polskiego/?tl=en)

71. Matura Exam in Poland, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.polandeducation.info/tests/polish-matura.html</u>](https://www.polandeducation.info/tests/polish-matura.html)

72. The Similarities Between Mikahil Bulgakov's The Master and ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1001&context=modlangrussian</u>](https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1001&context=modlangrussian)

73. Music - The Rolling Stones - 1968 - The Master and Margarita,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/05media/stones.html</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/05media/stones.html)

74. 5 songs you did not know were inspired by novels - The Indian
    Express, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://indianexpress.com/article/books-and-literature/5-songs-you-did-not-know-were-inspired-by-novels-10101664/</u>](https://indianexpress.com/article/books-and-literature/5-songs-you-did-not-know-were-inspired-by-novels-10101664/)

75. Bulgakov's “Moonlight Sonata”: The Thematic Functions of Grand Opera
    and Lieder in “The Master and Margarita” \| Writing Program - Boston
    University, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bu.edu/writingprogram/journal/past-issues/issue-2/collins/</u>](https://www.bu.edu/writingprogram/journal/past-issues/issue-2/collins/)

76. The Master and Margarita staged as “opera-musical” in Budapest \|
    Bachtrack, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bachtrack.com/review-video-master-margarita-gyongyosi-hungarian-state-opera-february-2021</u>](https://bachtrack.com/review-video-master-margarita-gyongyosi-hungarian-state-opera-february-2021)

77. Master and Margarita Project - Inna Faliks, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.innafaliks.com/projects/master-and-margarita-project/</u>](https://www.innafaliks.com/projects/master-and-margarita-project/)

78. Music - The Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/07recencies/muziek.html</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/07recencies/muziek.html)

79. THE MASTER AND MARGARITA \| Artwork - ArtFacts, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://artfacts.net/artwork/the-master-and-margarita/71812</u>](https://artfacts.net/artwork/the-master-and-margarita/71812)

80. The Master And Margarita. \| DegreeArt.com The Original Online Art
    Gallery, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.degreeart.com/master-and-margarita</u>](https://www.degreeart.com/master-and-margarita)

81. 140 Best THE MASTER AND MARGARITA ART ideas in 2025 - Pinterest,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.pinterest.com/mp7nyc/the-master-and-margarita-art/</u>](https://www.pinterest.com/mp7nyc/the-master-and-margarita-art/)

82. Adaptations - The Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/05media/index.html</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/05media/index.html)

83. A great film that flies completely under the radar in the western
    world: The Master and Margarita : r/movies - Reddit, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/movies/comments/1lgkmo0/a_great_film_that_flies_completely_under_the/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/movies/comments/1lgkmo0/a_great_film_that_flies_completely_under_the/)

84. Films \| Bulgakov Society, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bulgakovsociety.com/films/</u>](https://bulgakovsociety.com/films/)

85. The Master and Margarita (miniseries) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita\_(miniseries)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_and_Margarita_(miniseries))

86. The Master and Margarita Mikhail Bulgakov 1967 - Encyclopedia.com,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/educational-magazines/master-and-margarita</u>](https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/educational-magazines/master-and-margarita)

87. The Master & Margarita - Dacha Theatre, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.dachatheatre.com/mastermargarita.html</u>](https://www.dachatheatre.com/mastermargarita.html)

88. The Master and Margarita - HB Studio \| Ensemble Production, NYC
    Theater, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.hbstudio.org/productions/the-master-and-margarita/</u>](https://www.hbstudio.org/productions/the-master-and-margarita/)

89. Jean-Claude van Itallie, from the novel by Mikhail Bulgakov -
    Dramatists Play Service, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.dramatists.com/cgi-bin/db/single.asp?key=836</u>](https://www.dramatists.com/cgi-bin/db/single.asp?key=836)

90. The Master and Margarita: A Graphic Novel by Mikhail Bulgakov ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/the-master-and-margarita-mikhail-bulgakov/1132308189</u>](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/the-master-and-margarita-mikhail-bulgakov/1132308189)

91. The Master and Margarita: A Graphic Novel - TMORA Shop, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.shoptmora.org/the-master-and-margarita-a-graphic-novel.html</u>](https://www.shoptmora.org/the-master-and-margarita-a-graphic-novel.html)

92. The Master and Margarita - SelfMadeHero, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.selfmadehero.com/books/the-master-and-margarita</u>](https://www.selfmadehero.com/books/the-master-and-margarita)

93. The Master and Margarita (BBC 4) : r/BBCRadioDrama - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/BBCRadioDrama/comments/1lg0e6c/the_master_and_margarita_bbc_4/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/BBCRadioDrama/comments/1lg0e6c/the_master_and_margarita_bbc_4/)

94. Other interpretations - BBC World Service - The Master and
    Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/02themas/radiobbc.html</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/02themas/radiobbc.html)

95. Robin - TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@rawbeannn/video/7348689123277917486</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@rawbeannn/video/7348689123277917486)

96. Vasilisa and Maxim Stunning Performance at Russian Challenge -
    TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@torys_mom/video/7344700087693561090</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@torys_mom/video/7344700087693561090)

97. Concept art for the movie The Master and Margarita - ArtStation,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.artstation.com/artwork/39GgNE</u>](https://www.artstation.com/artwork/39GgNE)

98. Master and Margarita X Hellaverse by GurzheyV on DeviantArt,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.deviantart.com/gurzheyv/art/Master-and-Margarita-X-Hellaverse-1070163405</u>](https://www.deviantart.com/gurzheyv/art/Master-and-Margarita-X-Hellaverse-1070163405)

99. 97 - The Master and Margarita (with Sam Petersen and Stephen Hall) -
    Apple Podcasts, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://podcasts.apple.com/gb/podcast/97-the-master-and-margarita-with-sam/id1437951495?i=1000637495935</u>](https://podcasts.apple.com/gb/podcast/97-the-master-and-margarita-with-sam/id1437951495?i=1000637495935)

100. The Master, Margarita and the Artist \| Pushkin House Podcast
     Podcast - Everand, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.everand.com/podcast/506000628/The-Master-Margarita-and-the-Artist-When-an-old-cassette-tape-has-the-power-to-change-your-whole-future</u>](https://www.everand.com/podcast/506000628/The-Master-Margarita-and-the-Artist-When-an-old-cassette-tape-has-the-power-to-change-your-whole-future)

101. The Master and Margarita: Bulgakov's insane masterpiece you MUST
     read \| Good Art Bad Art \#30 - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4U72H1yjH_k</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4U72H1yjH_k)

102. 'The Master and Margarita': Highly successful Russian film takes
     aim at regime • FRANCE 24 English - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y6LHul8dEdg</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y6LHul8dEdg)

103. Making sense of 'The Master And Margarita' : r/books - Reddit,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/18s2bul/making_sense_of_the_master_and_margarita/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/18s2bul/making_sense_of_the_master_and_margarita/)

104. Spiritual Motives and Motivations in Mikhail Bulgakov's The Master
     ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://ojs.tnkul.pl/index.php/rh/article/view/9724</u>](https://ojs.tnkul.pl/index.php/rh/article/view/9724)

105. Mikhail Bulgakov State Museum, Moscow - Express to Russia,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.expresstorussia.com/guide/mikhail-bulgakov-state-museum.html</u>](https://www.expresstorussia.com/guide/mikhail-bulgakov-state-museum.html)

106. Mikhail Bulgakov Museum, Moscow, Russia - Google Arts & Culture,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://artsandculture.google.com/partner/bulgakov-museum</u>](https://artsandculture.google.com/partner/bulgakov-museum)

107. Margarita as Supernatural Woman: Bulgakov's Subversion of the ...,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://digitalcommons.du.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2251&context=etd</u>](https://digitalcommons.du.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2251&context=etd)

108. 'The Master and Margarita': First Look at a New Animated Take on
     Bulgakov's Popular Classic, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.animationmagazine.net/2025/06/the-master-and-margarita-first-look-at-an-animated-take-on-a-russian-classic/</u>](https://www.animationmagazine.net/2025/06/the-master-and-margarita-first-look-at-an-animated-take-on-a-russian-classic/)

109. The Master and Margarita (2005) — Satan visits Stalin's Russia -
     Mutant Reviewers, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://mutantreviewersmovies.com/2024/04/05/the-master-and-margarita-2005-satan-visits-stalins-russia/</u>](https://mutantreviewersmovies.com/2024/04/05/the-master-and-margarita-2005-satan-visits-stalins-russia/)

110. eben001_mastermargarita_glenny.pdf, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/eben001_mastermargarita_glenny.pdf</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/eben001_mastermargarita_glenny.pdf)

111. The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov \[FIRST POLISH EDITION
     / Nike / 1969\]., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://one.bid/en/knihy-a-stare-tisky-mistr-a-margarita-by-michail-bulgakov-prvni-polske-vydani-nike-1969/2170129</u>](https://one.bid/en/knihy-a-stare-tisky-mistr-a-margarita-by-michail-bulgakov-prvni-polske-vydani-nike-1969/2170129)

112. Vitaly Shentalinsky - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitaly_Shentalinsky</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vitaly_Shentalinsky)

113. Translation Criticism in Cyberspace – New Opportunities and,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://ejournals.eu/en/journal/przekladaniec/article/translation-criticism-in-cyberspace-new-opportunities-and-challenges-on-polish-translations-of-mikhail-bulgakovs-the-master-and-margarita</u>](https://ejournals.eu/en/journal/przekladaniec/article/translation-criticism-in-cyberspace-new-opportunities-and-challenges-on-polish-translations-of-mikhail-bulgakovs-the-master-and-margarita)

114. The Reception of Western Literature in Stalin's Russia: Dante
     Alighieri's 'Divine Comedy' and Mikhail Bulgakov's 'The Master and
     Margarita' - Research Explorer The University of Manchester,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://research.manchester.ac.uk/en/studentTheses/the-reception-of-western-literature-in-stalins-russia-dante-aligh</u>](https://research.manchester.ac.uk/en/studentTheses/the-reception-of-western-literature-in-stalins-russia-dante-aligh)

115. Elements of Satire and the Grotesque in the Prose of M.A. Bulgakov
     Barbara Blake - The Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen048_blake.pdf</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen048_blake.pdf)

116. Mikhail Bulgakov and Salman Rushdie: Similarities and Differences
     between The Master and Margarita and The Satanic Verses, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.aatseel.org/100111/pdf/program/2004/abstracts/kondoyanidi.htm</u>](https://www.aatseel.org/100111/pdf/program/2004/abstracts/kondoyanidi.htm)

117. University of Alberta - ERA, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://era.library.ualberta.ca/items/9d41381b-f93c-4fc6-9e38-db4b13129a84/download/c1739e87-4392-4ec6-b2ff-e2605b292eed</u>](https://era.library.ualberta.ca/items/9d41381b-f93c-4fc6-9e38-db4b13129a84/download/c1739e87-4392-4ec6-b2ff-e2605b292eed)

118. Rediscovering The Master and Margarita: from Creation to Adaptation
     Olga Leshcheva, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen055_leshcheva.pdf</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen055_leshcheva.pdf)

119. (PDF) Reading The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov as ...,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/382320665_Reading_The_Master_and_Margarita_by_Mikhail_Bulgakov_as_Fantastic_Literature</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/382320665_Reading_The_Master_and_Margarita_by_Mikhail_Bulgakov_as_Fantastic_Literature)

120. Reading The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov as Fantastic
     Literature \| Mapping the Impossible: Journal for Fantasy
     Research - Glasgow Open Journals, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://journals.gla.ac.uk/fantasy-research/article/view/48</u>](https://journals.gla.ac.uk/fantasy-research/article/view/48)

121. The Sources for Mikhail Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen037_sokolov.pdf</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/estore/pdf/emen037_sokolov.pdf)

122. The Variety Theatre - The Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/04mappen/variete.html</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/04mappen/variete.html)

123. Pop music - The Master and Margarita, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/05media/muziekpop.html</u>](https://www.masterandmargarita.eu/en/05media/muziekpop.html)

124. The influence of M.A. Bulgakov's novel “The Master and Margarita
     ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380996385_The_influence_of_MA_Bulgakov's_novel_The_Master_and_Margarita_to_Yu_Hua's_novel_Brothers_carnivalization_as_a_way_of_forming_a_novel_narrative</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380996385_The_influence_of_MA_Bulgakov's_novel_The_Master_and_Margarita_to_Yu_Hua's_novel_Brothers_carnivalization_as_a_way_of_forming_a_novel_narrative)
