# One Book to Rule Them All: An International Journey into The Lord of the Rings

Original Title: The Lord of the Rings

Original Language: English

Original Publication: 1954-1955 by Allen & Unwin

## Introduction: Why Should I Care?

You’ve seen the memes . You’ve played the video games . You’ve watched
the epic movies that won a staggering 17 Academy Awards . But behind the
internet jokes about walking into Mordor and the blockbuster battle
scenes lies a story that has profoundly shaped modern culture . Written
by an English professor over 17 years, *The Lord of the Rings* is more
than just a fantasy novel; it’s a global phenomenon that has been
translated into dozens of languages and embraced by vastly different
cultures, from the counter-culture hippies of 1960s America to the
post-communist youth of Poland .

This report is your guide to understanding how this happened. It’s an
international journey into a book that became a global language for
heroism, friendship, and the struggle against darkness. We’ll explore
how J.R.R. Tolkien’s personal experiences in the trenches of World War I
shaped the battles of Middle-earth, how a pirate paperback edition
accidentally made the book a sensation, and how readers from Warsaw to
Tokyo found their own histories and hopes reflected in its pages. This
isn't just a story about elves and hobbits; it's a story about how one
book became a mirror for our world.

### Skip to This Part If...

- **...You Need to Write a School Essay:** Jump to **Part II** for
  symbolism and **Part VI** for key themes and quotes.

- **...You're a Gamer or Movie Buff:** **Part V** covers all the
  adaptations, from films to video games.

- **...You're Here for the Memes:** **Part V** has a deep dive into how
  "One does not simply walk into Mordor" took over the internet.

- **...You're Interested in Polish History:** **Part IV** is a special
  report just for you, connecting Middle-earth to the Winged Hussars and
  Warsaw's "Mordor."

- **...You Want the Wildest Facts:** Check out the "Mind-Blown Moment"
  sections for surprising details and debunked myths.

## Part I: The Forging of a Legend: Creation and Context

The story of *The Lord of the Rings* didn’t begin with a grand vision of
a dark lord and a heroic quest. It started with a simple request from a
publisher and evolved through a slow, messy, and deeply human process of
discovery that spanned nearly two decades of war, academic duty, and
personal hardship.

### "A Tale Grew in the Telling": The 17-Year Quest to Write a Book

In December 1937, fresh off the success of his children's book *The
Hobbit*, J.R.R. Tolkien’s publisher asked for a sequel . Tolkien began
writing what he called "a new Hobbit," initially planning a simple tale
where Bilbo Baggins, having spent all his treasure, goes on another
adventure to get more. He had no idea where the story would lead. By
December 19, he had a five-page draft of the first chapter, "A Long
Expected Party," but the true significance of Bilbo's magic ring and the
epic scale of the story only began to emerge in 1938.

Tolkien often described his writing process not as inventing a story,
but as "discovering" one that was already there . He compared it to
"gardening" rather than "architecture," letting the plot grow
organically . This led to constant changes and unforeseen developments.
The noble hero Aragorn, for example, started life as a quirky hobbit
with wooden shoes named "Trotter" . The powerful Elf-queen Galadriel was
a complete surprise, emerging fully formed only when the hobbits arrived
in Lórien in his drafts. The entire, crucial subplot involving the
wizard Saruman and the kingdom of Rohan did not exist at all in early
outlines .

This process of discovery was painstakingly slow, lasting from 1937
until the book's publication in 1954-1955. As a full-time professor at
Oxford University, Tolkien could only find time to write by "stealing"
it from his academic duties and marking exams to earn extra income .
During World War II and its aftermath, paper was scarce and of poor
quality, forcing him to write entire chapters on the back of student
examination papers . Over the years, he stopped writing repeatedly,
sometimes for years at a time. The final original manuscript, a
testament to this immense labor, totaled 9,250 pages and is now
preserved in the J.R.R. Tolkien Collection at Marquette University in
the United States.

### The Professor's Crucible: Real-World Influences on Middle-earth

Middle-earth was not created in a vacuum. It was forged in the crucible
of Tolkien's own life, shaped by his experiences of war, his deep
Catholic faith, and his academic passion for language.

- **World War I and the "Lost Generation":** In 1916, Tolkien served as
  an officer at the Battle of the Somme, one of the bloodiest battles in
  human history . He survived months in the trenches but contracted
  "trench fever" and was sent back to England. By the war's end, all but
  one of his closest childhood friends—a tight-knit creative group
  called the T.C.B.S.—had been killed in action. He began writing his
  foundational myths, which would later become *The Silmarillion*,
  partly in their memory. The horrors of mechanized warfare, the
  profound bonds of fellowship between soldiers, and the devastation of
  the English countryside by industrialization are themes that echo
  throughout *The Lord of the Rings*, from the Dead Marshes to the
  Scouring of the Shire .

- **A "Fundamentally Catholic Work":** Tolkien was a devout Roman
  Catholic, and he described *The Lord of the Rings* as "a fundamentally
  religious and Catholic work; unconsciously so at first, but
  consciously in the revision" . He deliberately avoided explicit
  religious allegory, instead choosing to have the Christian themes of
  grace, mercy, free will, and resurrection "absorbed into the story and
  the symbolism" . This spiritual dimension underpins the entire
  narrative, from Gandalf's return from death to Frodo's pity for Gollum
  .

- **A Love of Language:** Above all, Tolkien was a philologist, a
  scholar of the history of language. His true passion was inventing
  languages, such as the Elvish tongues of Quenya and Sindarin . He once
  stated that his work was "fundamentally linguistic in inspiration" .
  For Tolkien, the stories often existed to provide a world and a
  history for his languages to inhabit, not the other way around . This
  is why the world feels so deep and real—its history is rooted in the
  etymology of its names and the grammar of its tongues.

### Publication, Pirates, and Popularity

When the massive book was finally finished in 1949, it faced another
hurdle: publication. Due to its immense length and the high cost of
paper in post-war Britain, his publisher, Allen & Unwin, decided it was
too risky to release as a single book . Instead, they split it into
three volumes, published over the course of a year from 1954 to 1955 .
This purely economic decision is the reason the work is often called a
"trilogy," a term Tolkien himself felt was incorrect as he always
intended it to be one single story .

The book sold well but remained a niche success until a twist of fate
turned it into a global phenomenon. In the early 1960s, a publisher
named Ace Books discovered that the American hardcover edition had not
been properly copyrighted in the United States . In 1965, they released
an unauthorized, "pirate" paperback edition . This cheap, mass-market
version was quickly adopted by the 1960s counter-culture movement on
American college campuses . Students and hippies saw the hobbits'
peaceful, agrarian life as an anti-industrial ideal, and the war against
Sauron as a metaphor for the struggle against the military-industrial
complex and the Vietnam War . Tolkien was reportedly appalled by this
"deplorable cultus," but the book's popularity exploded . The fan outcry
against the pirate edition was so strong that Ace Books withdrew it, and
an official, revised paperback was released by Ballantine Books, selling
a quarter of a million copies in ten months and cementing *The Lord of
the Rings* as a cultural icon .

### Mind-Blown Moment: Debunking Common Myths

- **Myth:** Sauron was just a giant flaming eye in a tower.

- **Fact:** Sauron had a physical body during the events of *The Lord of
  the Rings*. Gollum, who was tortured by him, tells Frodo that Sauron
  has only four fingers on his black hand (after Isildur cut off the one
  with the Ring) . Tolkien himself stated that Sauron should be imagined
  as a being of more than human stature, but "in the likeness of a man,
  but greater and more terrible" . The Great Eye was his symbol and a
  manifestation of his will, not his literal form.

- **Myth:** The book is a direct allegory for World War II, with Mordor
  as Nazi Germany.

- **Fact:** Tolkien "cordially dislike\[d\] allegory in all its
  manifestations" and repeatedly denied this interpretation . He began
  writing the story in 1937, long before the war's outcome was known,
  and pointed out that if it were an allegory, the Ring would have been
  used against Sauron, not destroyed . He preferred "history, true or
  feigned, with its varied applicability to the thought and experience
  of readers" .

- **Myth:** Balrogs have wings.

- **Fact:** This is one of the most heated debates in the fandom. The
  text in *The Fellowship of the Ring* states that the Balrog's "shadow
  about it reached out like two vast wings" . Whether these were
  functional, physical wings or simply wing-shaped shadows is a point of
  intense, and ultimately unresolved, scholarly and fan debate.

## Part II: The Languages of Middle-earth: Symbolism and Meaning Across Cultures

Beyond the thrilling plot, *The Lord of the Rings* is a rich tapestry of
symbols and hidden meanings. Its core ideas about power, good, evil, and
hope have resonated with millions, but the way these symbols are
understood often changes dramatically depending on the cultural lens
through which they are viewed.

### The Ring of Power: A Symbol for All Seasons

The One Ring is the undisputed center of the story. Forged by the Dark
Lord Sauron, it is the ultimate symbol of the corrupting nature of
absolute power . It represents temptation and the insidious way that a
desire for control can enslave the will of even the most good-hearted
individuals . The Ring is not just a magical tool; it is a vessel
containing Sauron's own malice and will to dominate all life .

This core meaning is universal, but its specific interpretation shifts
across cultures. In Western societies with a deep Christian heritage,
the Ring's temptation is often read through the theological lens of
Original Sin and the struggle against evil . For readers in countries
with a history of totalitarianism, such as Poland or Russia during the
Cold War, the Ring can be seen as a powerful symbol of oppressive state
ideology—a force that demands absolute conformity and crushes individual
will . In the context of modern global capitalism, some critics
interpret the Ring as a metaphor for the corrupting influence of
technology and unchecked greed .

Tolkien's choice of a ring is particularly potent because, across nearly
all human cultures, rings traditionally symbolize positive concepts:
eternity, unity, commitment, and authority . From ancient Egyptian
wedding bands to the signet rings of kings, their circular shape
represents an unbroken, positive bond . By subverting this
near-universal symbol and turning it into an instrument of enslavement,
Tolkien creates a powerful sense of violation and wrongness that is
understood instinctively by readers everywhere.

### Light vs. Shadow, West vs. East: A Moral Geography

The narrative is built on a powerful symbolic geography. The conflict is
framed as a struggle between the Light of the West—the direction of
Valinor, the Undying Lands—and the encroaching Shadow of the East, the
location of Mordor . This creates a "moral geography" where direction
itself has meaning. This is reinforced by other elemental symbols: water
is consistently a force for good, representing life, cleansing, and
salvation, as when the river floods the Nazgûl . In contrast, unnatural
fire, smoke, and industrial machinery are associated with Saruman and
Sauron's evil .

However, this symbolic mapping has become one of the most criticized
aspects of the work in modern academic circles. The fact that the "good"
peoples of the West (Elves, Men of Gondor) are consistently depicted as
fair-skinned and noble, while the Men who fight for Sauron (the
Easterlings and Haradrim) are described as "swarthy" or dark-skinned,
has led to charges that the book perpetuates a Eurocentric and racially
problematic worldview . This complex and controversial topic, which pits
the book's internal symbolism against modern sensibilities, will be
explored in greater detail in Part VI.

### A "Fundamentally Catholic Work": The Hidden Theology

As a devout Catholic, Tolkien infused his work with theological
concepts, though he kept them below the surface. The story operates on a
principle of divine Providence, where a higher power, Eru Ilúvatar,
subtly guides events toward a good outcome without overriding the free
will of the characters . Gandalf's death in his battle with the Balrog
and his return as Gandalf the White is a clear resurrection motif,
representing a second chance and an increase in divine authority .

Perhaps the most important theological concept Tolkien developed was
what he called **"eucatastrophe."** He defined this as the sudden,
joyous turn of events when all hope seems lost—a miraculous grace that
delivers salvation from the jaws of defeat . The prime examples in the
story are the sudden arrival of the Eagles at the Black Gate and, most
importantly, Gollum's accidental fall into the Cracks of Doom, which
destroys the Ring at the very moment Frodo has failed and claimed it for
himself. For Tolkien, this was the highest function of a fairy-story,
and he saw the Christian Gospel itself as the "Greatest Fairy Story,"
with the Resurrection of Christ being the ultimate eucatastrophe .

The reception of these deeply embedded themes varies significantly. In
largely secular countries like France, academic analysis has tended to
focus more on the book's literary structure and its medieval sources .
In contrast, in a country like Italy, the book's themes of a heroic,
mythic past fighting against a corrupt, materialist modernity were
seized upon by the far-right political movement in the 1970s, creating a
political interpretation that Tolkien himself would have undoubtedly
rejected . This demonstrates how the "applicability" of the story's
themes allows them to be adapted to fit vastly different cultural and
ideological frameworks.

## Part III: The World Discovers Middle-earth: A Global Reception History

The journey of *The Lord of the Rings* from an English story to a global
myth is a fascinating tale of cultural translation. The book did not
land in different countries in the same way; instead, each culture read
it through the lens of its own history, politics, and literary
traditions, creating unique and sometimes contradictory interpretations.

### United Kingdom: A Prophet Without Honour?

In its homeland, the book's reception was sharply divided. It found
immediate and enthusiastic supporters among literary friends of Tolkien,
such as the poet W.H. Auden and the author C.S. Lewis, who hailed it as
a "masterpiece" . However, the broader British literary establishment
was often dismissive, if not openly hostile. The influential American
critic Edmund Wilson, writing for a UK audience, famously dismissed the
work as "juvenile trash" . The Scottish poet Edwin Muir criticized its
characters as immature "boys masquerading as adult heroes" who would
"never come to puberty" . Even within Tolkien's own literary circle, the
Inklings, support was not universal; his friend Hugo Dyson was recorded
as lying on a couch during readings and shouting, "Oh God, no more
Elves!" . This initial skepticism from the literary elite meant that for
many years, the book's immense popularity with readers was at odds with
its critical standing.

### Germany: A Mythology for a Post-War World

The book's journey into German was not easy. For a long time, no major
German publisher would take it on, until the educational publisher
Klett-Cotta took a risk that ultimately proved to be a massive
commercial success . Today, *Der Herr der Ringe* is considered a
foundational classic of *High Fantasy* in Germany . The reception,
however, has been colored by the nation's 20th-century history. Some
German academic analyses have viewed the work through a critical
post-war lens, questioning its depiction of "hereditarily good" and
"genetically evil" races and its "bio- and geopolitical" framework,
suggesting it echoes problematic modes of thinking from the pre-1945 era
.

### France: Overcoming the Author's "Gallophobia"

Tolkien himself held a personal and professional dislike for French
culture, which he called "Gallophobia" . This stemmed from his traumatic
experiences fighting in France during World War I and his academic
belief as a philologist that the Norman-French conquest of 1066 had
corrupted his beloved Old English language . Despite the author's own
prejudices, *Le Seigneur des Anneaux* eventually found a strong footing
in France. French academic scholarship is now robust, focusing on the
book's literary structure, its medieval sources, and its complex genesis
. While the first French-language book-length study did not appear until
the late 1990s, the story now has a firm place in the culture, as
evidenced by events like marathon film screenings in Paris that draw
large crowds .

### Russia: From ***Samizdat*** to Mainstream

The book's story in Russia is one of prohibition and rebellion. During
the Soviet era, its themes of a struggle against a dark power in the
East made it politically unacceptable for official publication . It was
effectively banned, circulating only in secret, hand-typed underground
editions known as *samizdat* . The first translators had to disguise the
work as science fiction to even attempt to get it past the censors .
After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, this forbidden text exploded
into the mainstream, filling a cultural and spiritual vacuum left by the
collapse of communism . This led to the formation of over a hundred
Tolkien fan clubs and the rise of massive live-action role-playing
"Hobbit Games" . The Russian historical context created a unique
reading; for many, the war against Mordor was a direct allegory for the
struggle against the totalitarianism of the USSR . This interpretation
also inspired uniquely Russian fan works, such as Kirill Eskov's 1999
novel *The Last Ringbearer*, which retells the entire story from the
perspective of Mordor, portraying it as a burgeoning industrial
civilization crushed by the magic-wielding, reactionary forces of
Gandalf and the Elves .

### Italy: An Unlikely Political Symbol

The book’s reception in Italy is perhaps the most politically charged in
the world. The first translation of *The Fellowship of the Ring* in 1967
was a commercial failure, and the project was abandoned . In the
politically turbulent 1970s, however, the book was rediscovered and
championed by the youth wing of the Italian Social Movement, a
neo-fascist political party . For these young far-right activists, who
felt alienated from both capitalist consumerism and left-wing Marxism,
Tolkien's world offered a powerful alternative mythology. They
interpreted the story as a defense of tradition, identity, and sacred
values against the decay of modernity . This led to the creation of
"Campi Hobbit" (Hobbit Camps), political youth festivals that combined
music, art, and ideology under the banner of Tolkien's world . This
association has remained so strong that Italy's current prime minister,
Giorgia Meloni, who came from this political tradition, has frequently
cited Tolkien as a major influence, calling the book "a manifesto"
rather than mere fantasy .

### Spain: A Late Arrival, A Cinematic Boom

Compared to other European nations, Middle-earth arrived late in the
Spanish-speaking world. The first Castilian Spanish translations were
not published until the late 1970s, appearing first in Argentina before
coming to Spain . For decades, the books were appreciated by a dedicated
but relatively small readership. This changed completely with the
release of Peter Jackson's film trilogy in 2001. The films created an
unprecedented boom in popularity, with sales reportedly reaching a
million copies in Spain in 2001 alone. This cinematic explosion cemented
Tolkien's status as a major literary figure and spurred a new wave of
Spanish-language academic study and cultural appreciation .

### Japan: A European Myth in a New Context

The first Japanese translation of *The Lord of the Rings* (*Yubiwa
Monogatari*) appeared in 1972 . The task presented unique cultural and
linguistic challenges. The translator, Teiji Seta, a respected scholar
of traditional Japanese poetry, was praised for his beautiful rendering
of the book's many songs . However, certain concepts were difficult to
bridge; for example, Éowyn's famous line "I am no man" is tricky to
translate directly, as Japanese lacks a single word with the same broad
meaning of "man" as both a gender and a species . The cultural reception
was also different. Themes of nostalgia for a lost, pre-industrial past
may have resonated differently in Japan, a nation that underwent its own
extremely rapid and deliberate industrialization during the Meiji
Restoration and possessed a rich, unbroken tradition of its own
mythology and folklore . While the book has a dedicated following, its
influence on Japanese fantasy has been less direct than in the West,
with native genres like *isekai* and franchises like *Record of Lodoss
War* drawing more heavily on Dungeons & Dragons and local traditions .

## Part IV: The Polish Saga: A Special Focus on ***Władca Pierścieni***

Nowhere is the relationship between *The Lord of the Rings* and a
national culture more profound and complex than in Poland. From being
one of the first countries in the world to translate the epic, to fierce
public debates over its language, to seeing its own history reflected in
the charge of the Rohirrim, Polish readers have embraced *Władca
Pierścieni* with a unique passion.

### A Pioneer's Translation: Maria Skibniewska's ***Władca Pierścieni***

The first Polish translation of *The Lord of the Rings* was a pioneering
achievement. Translated by the esteemed Maria Skibniewska, with poetic
sections handled by Włodzimierz Lewik and Andrzej Nowicki, the three
volumes were published by Spółdzielnia Wydawnicza „Czytelnik” between
1961 and 1963. This was remarkably early for a work of fantasy to cross
the Iron Curtain, making the Polish version only the third translation
in the world, following the Dutch (1956-57) and Swedish (1959-60)
editions.

Skibniewska's translation is overwhelmingly considered the "canonical"
version by generations of Polish fans and scholars . Her approach was
one of deep respect for the source text. In 1959, she initiated
correspondence with Tolkien's publisher to ask for guidance, which was
forwarded to the author himself . Tolkien, who was often critical of
translations, later praised her as "the Polish lady," noting her humble
and careful approach . Following his advice, Skibniewska's philosophy
was to preserve the original English feel of the names and places,
translating only those with clear semantic meaning . This decision would
become the cornerstone of a major cultural debate decades later.

### The Great Translation Debate: Skibniewska vs. Łoziński

In the mid-1990s, the publisher Zysk i S-ka commissioned a new
translation by Jerzy Łoziński, released in 1996-1997 . Łoziński adopted
a radically different philosophy from Skibniewska. He aimed to
"transcreate" the work, to render it in a way that felt as if Tolkien
had been a Polish author, fully domesticating the names and cultural
feel of the text .

This resulted in a series of controversial changes that became known as
*łozizmy* ("Łozisms"). He changed names to make them sound more Polish
or to reflect their etymological meaning in a folksy, sometimes jarring
way. This created a version of Middle-earth that was almost
unrecognizable to readers of the original translation. The debate that
erupted among Polish Tolkien fans was intense and reveals how deeply the
book had been absorbed into the culture. The majority of readers and
critics fiercely defended Skibniewska's version, viewing Łoziński's
changes as a betrayal of Tolkien's tone and intent . His translation was
often described as clumsy, infantilizing, and stylistically poor .
However, Łoziński's version has its defenders, who argue that its style
is more "literary" and that by Polonizing the names, it creates a more
immersive and less foreign-feeling world for a Polish reader .

**Table 1: A Tale of Two Translations (Skibniewska vs. Łoziński)**

| English Original | Skibniewska (1961-63) | Łoziński (1996-97) | Analysis of Choice |
|----|----|----|----|
| **Baggins** | Baggins | Bagosz | Skibniewska preserves the original name, following Tolkien's advice . Łoziński adapts it to a more Slavic-sounding surname . |
| **Strider** | Obieżyświat | Łazik | Skibniewska's "Obieżyświat" means "one who travels the world," a poetic and heroic term . Łoziński's "Łazik" means "rover" or "crawler," a term many found undignified and reminiscent of a vehicle . |
| **Rivendell** | Rivendell | Tajar | Skibniewska keeps the original, which has no direct meaning in English. Łoziński invents a new, fantasy-sounding name . |
| **Dwarves** | Krasnoludy | Krzaty | This is the most famous controversy. *Krasnoludy* is the standard Polish word for the fantasy race of Dwarves. *Krzaty* is a word for smaller, gnome-like or sprite-like creatures from folklore, which critics felt completely misrepresented Tolkien's race . |
| **The Shire** | Shire | Włość | Skibniewska preserves the English name. Łoziński translates it as *Włość*, an archaic Polish term for a landed estate or domain, domesticating the concept . |

### A Mirror to Polish History: From Vienna to the Vistula

For many Polish readers, the appeal of *The Lord of the Rings* goes
beyond fantasy; it resonates with the nation's own history of struggle
and heroism.

- **The Ride of the Rohirrim and the Winged Hussars:** The most powerful
  of these connections is the widely held interpretation that the charge
  of the Rohirrim to save Minas Tirith is a literary echo of the 1683
  Battle of Vienna. In that historic battle, Polish King Jan III
  Sobieski led the Polish Winged Hussars in the largest cavalry charge
  in history, breaking the Ottoman siege and, in the popular narrative,
  "saving Europe" . The parallels are striking: a great city of the
  "West" under desperate siege by a massive army from the "East," saved
  at the last moment by the thunderous arrival of horsemen from the
  north . This reading allows Polish readers to see one of their
  greatest national triumphs reflected in one of modern literature's
  most iconic scenes.

- **Gandalf and the Spirit of the Mountains:** Another fascinating link
  connects Gandalf's appearance to Central European folklore. It is
  believed that Tolkien owned a postcard featuring a depiction of the
  folklore figure Rübezahl, known in Polish as *Liczyrzepa* or *Duch
  Gór* (the Spirit of the Mountains) . This mythical being, said to
  inhabit the Karkonosze Mountains on the Polish-Czech border, is often
  portrayed as a wandering old man with a long beard, a staff, and a
  wide-brimmed hat—an image strikingly similar to that of Gandalf the
  Grey .

### ***Władca Pierścieni*** in Polish Culture

The book's influence has seeped into Polish education, language, and
literature.

- **In the Classroom (*Lektura Szkolna*):** The book has been a part of
  the official school reading list in Poland for years. In a 2007
  curriculum update, *The Lord of the Rings* was designated as mandatory
  reading (*lektura obowiązkowa*) for students in the fifth and sixth
  grades of primary school . In more recent curriculum changes, its
  status has been adjusted. Currently, *The Hobbit* is mandatory for
  grades 4-6, while *The Fellowship of the Ring* is listed as
  supplementary reading (*lektura uzupełniająca*) for high schools and
  technical schools . This presence in the school system has ensured
  that generations of Poles have grown up with Middle-earth as part of
  their literary education.

- **Mordor on Domaniewska Street:** In a unique and humorous example of
  cultural assimilation, a large corporate office park in Warsaw's
  Służewiec district became popularly known as "Mordor na Domaniewskiej"
  (Mordor on Domaniewska Street) . The nickname, coined by office
  workers, refers to the district's imposing, dark glass buildings and
  the daily "hellish" traffic jams . The name became so widespread and
  beloved that in 2022, the city of Warsaw, after public consultations,
  officially named two new intersecting streets in the area *ulica
  J.R.R. Tolkiena* and *ulica Gandalfa* (Gandalf Street) .

- **Influence on Polish Fantasy:** While the initial 1960s publication
  had a limited print run, the book's eventual widespread popularity was
  a cornerstone for the development of modern Polish fantasy literature
  . It became a key point of reference for the generation of writers who
  emerged in the 1980s and 1990s. The most famous of these is Andrzej
  Sapkowski, creator of *The Witcher* saga. Sapkowski has frequently
  acknowledged Tolkien's impact, calling his first reading of
  Skibniewska's translation a "revelation" . At the same time, he
  consciously set out to create a distinctively Polish and Slavic form
  of fantasy, stating that the discerning Polish reader "was not going
  to accept... a simple copy of Tolkien" . In this way, *The Lord of the
  Rings* served both as an inspiration and a challenge for Polish
  authors to find their own voice within the genre.

## Part V: The Legend Lives On: Adaptations and Digital Afterlife

The story of *The Lord of the Rings* no longer lives only on the printed
page. Over the past half-century, it has been adapted, remixed, and
reinterpreted across every imaginable medium, creating a vast digital
and cultural afterlife that continues to introduce new generations to
Middle-earth.

### From Page to Screen (and Screen Again)

The journey to a successful screen adaptation was long and fraught with
challenges.

- **Early Animated Attempts:** Before the live-action blockbusters,
  several animated versions brought Middle-earth to life. The American
  animator Ralph Bakshi directed an ambitious, rotoscoped *The Lord of
  the Rings* in 1978, but it was only the first part of an intended
  two-part story that was never completed . The animation studio
  Rankin-Bass, famous for its holiday specials, produced televised
  versions of *The Hobbit* in 1977 and *The Return of the King* in 1980
  to bookend Bakshi's film . There were also lesser-known international
  productions, including a 1993 live-action miniseries in Finland called
  *Hobitit* .

- **Peter Jackson's Cinematic Trilogy (2001-2003):** The definitive
  screen adaptation is Peter Jackson's trilogy. It was a monumental and
  risky film project, with all three movies shot simultaneously in
  Jackson's native New Zealand over 274 days with a budget of \$281
  million . The films were a colossal critical and commercial success,
  grossing over \$2.9 billion worldwide and winning a combined 17
  Academy Awards. *The Return of the King* swept the 2004 Oscars,
  winning all 11 awards for which it was nominated, tying the all-time
  record held by *Ben-Hur* and *Titanic* .

- **The Rise of Tolkien Tourism:** The films transformed New Zealand's
  tourism industry. The country's stunning landscapes became synonymous
  with Middle-earth, leading to a massive influx of visitors. The annual
  number of tourists grew by 40%, from 1.7 million in 2000 to 2.4
  million in 2006, an increase attributed in large part to the films .
  This phenomenon, known as "Tolkien tourism," has had a lasting
  economic impact, with 6% of international visitors citing the films as
  a reason for their trip . Key filming locations, especially the
  permanent Hobbiton movie set built on a farm near Matamata, have
  become major tourist destinations offering guided tours .

### Press Start to Begin Quest: A History of Middle-earth in Video Games

Tolkien's influence on the world of gaming is foundational. The very
concept of the fantasy role-playing game (RPG) was born from a desire to
explore worlds like Middle-earth.

- **The Progenitor of RPGs:** Gary Gygax, the co-creator of *Dungeons &
  Dragons* (D&D), was heavily inspired by Tolkien's work . The presence
  of elves, dwarves, orcs, halflings (a term D&D was forced to use after
  Tolkien's estate objected to the use of "hobbit"), and wizards in D&D
  and countless subsequent games is a direct legacy of *The Lord of the
  Rings* .

- **A Vast Library of Games:** Since the dawn of the video game era,
  there have been dozens of officially licensed games set in
  Middle-earth. These have spanned every genre, from early text
  adventures in the 1980s to real-time strategy games like *The Battle
  for Middle-earth* (2004) and massive online worlds like the
  still-running *The Lord of the Rings Online* (2007) . More recent
  titles, such as the action-RPGs *Middle-earth: Shadow of
  Mordor* (2014) and *Shadow of War* (2017), have introduced new
  generations of gamers to the lore through interactive storytelling.

### The Memes of Power: Middle-earth in Internet Culture

In the 21st century, the most visible legacy of *The Lord of the Rings*
may be its complete saturation of internet culture through memes. The
dialogue and imagery from Peter Jackson's films provided perfect
material for the early internet's burgeoning visual language.

- **"One Does Not Simply Walk into Mordor":** This line, spoken with
  grave seriousness by Boromir (Sean Bean) at the Council of Elrond, is
  perhaps the most famous and enduring LOTR meme . It became a snowclone
  template—"One does not simply X"—used to humorously describe any task
  that is more difficult than it appears. Its visual format, with a
  still of Boromir and the iconic text, is instantly recognizable across
  the globe.

- **Viral Video Remix:** Another early internet sensation was a 2005
  video remix by Erwin Beekveld featuring Legolas's dramatic line,
  "They're taking the Hobbits to Isengard!" . The repetitive, catchy
  video was one of the first truly viral moments for the fandom and
  remains a classic piece of internet history.

- **Other Viral Moments:** The films are a treasure trove of meme-able
  content. Key examples that have become part of the online vernacular
  include Frodo's accusatory "Alright, then. Keep your secrets," Sam's
  enthusiastic ode to "PO-TAY-TOES," and Aragorn's defiant battle cry,
  "But it is not this day," a line so iconic it was even referenced in
  the song "Not Today" by the global K-pop superstars BTS .

### The Fandom of the Ring: Digital Communities

While Tolkien fandom began with letters and small clubs in the 1960s,
the internet allowed it to grow into a massive, interconnected global
community .

- **Forums and Fan Sites:** Websites like TheOneRing.net (TORn), founded
  in 1999, became essential hubs for news and discussion, even
  developing a working relationship with the filmmakers themselves .

- **Reddit:** Today, Reddit hosts numerous vibrant communities.
  Subreddits like r/lotr and r/tolkienfans are home to serious
  discussion and scholarship, while r/lotrmemes is dedicated entirely to
  the creation and sharing of jokes and memes, demonstrating the breadth
  of fan engagement .

- **Discord:** For fans seeking real-time interaction, Discord servers
  dedicated to the lore, films, and games provide spaces for
  conversation, book clubs, and even online role-playing .

- **Fanfiction and Fan Art:** Creative fan communities flourish on
  platforms like Archive of Our Own (AO3), which hosts tens of thousands
  of fan-written stories set in Middle-earth. These works often explore
  untold stories, alternate universes (AUs), and character relationships
  not present in the original text. A popular subgenre, particularly
  among Gen Z fans, is the "Modern Character in Middle Earth" or
  *isekai* story, where a person from our world is magically transported
  into Tolkien's, blending modern sensibilities with the fantasy setting
  .

## Part VI: Finding Yourself in Middle-earth: Identity and Relevance Today

For a book written over 70 years ago, *The Lord of the Rings* remains
incredibly relevant. New generations of readers and scholars are
constantly engaging with the text, applying new critical lenses and
finding new meanings that speak to the most urgent conversations of our
time, from social justice and identity to the nature of heroism itself.

### A Question of Race: Debating the Peoples of Middle-earth

One of the most intense and important modern debates about the book
centers on its depiction of race.

- **The Critical View:** Many contemporary scholars and readers point to
  a troubling pattern in the book's "moral geography" . The forces of
  good—Elves, Men of the West, Hobbits—are consistently described as
  fair-skinned and are culturally coded as European (specifically,
  Northern European) . Conversely, the humans who serve Sauron, like the
  Easterlings and the Haradrim, are described as "swarthy," and the Orcs
  are depicted in a private letter by Tolkien as "degraded and repulsive
  versions of the (to Europeans) least lovely Mongol-types" . This has
  led to the critique that the book, intentionally or not, perpetuates a
  Eurocentric and racialized worldview where whiteness is aligned with
  good and darkness with evil .

- **The Author's Context:** This critique is complicated by Tolkien's
  own life and stated beliefs. He was vocally anti-racist. He expressed
  horror at the apartheid system in his birth country of South Africa .
  Most famously, when a German publisher in 1938 inquired if he was of
  "Aryan" descent before publishing *The Hobbit*, Tolkien drafted a
  scathing reply stating his regret that he appeared to have "no
  ancestors of that gifted people" (referring to the Jewish people) .

- **A Modern Discussion:** This creates a complex picture for modern
  readers. It is possible for a work of art to reflect the unexamined
  biases and racialized language of its time, even if the author was
  personally opposed to racism. Rather than simply dismissing the book
  as racist or defending it as flawless, the modern approach is to
  engage with this tension critically. It allows readers to appreciate
  the story's power while also understanding and discussing its
  problematic elements.

### "I Am No Man": Women and Power in a Masculine World

A similar critical conversation revolves around the representation of
women and gender.

- **The Feminist Critique:** For decades, critics have pointed out the
  stark lack of female characters in the story . The Fellowship is
  entirely male, and the few women who do appear, such as Arwen, can be
  seen as passive love interests or idealized figures rather than fully
  developed characters . Tolkien's own letters reveal a traditionalist,
  and by modern standards, sexist view of gender roles .

- **Éowyn and Galadriel as Feminist Icons:** At the same time, the book
  provides two of the most powerful female characters in the fantasy
  genre. Galadriel is one of the oldest, wisest, and most powerful
  beings in Middle-earth, the bearer of an Elven Ring of Power who
  resists the temptation of the One Ring where many great men failed .
  And Éowyn, the Shieldmaiden of Rohan, defies the patriarchal
  expectations of her society to ride into battle in disguise. Her
  triumphant declaration before slaying the Witch-king—"I am no
  man!"—has become an iconic feminist line . These characters allow for
  a feminist reading that sees women subverting the very roles the
  narrative seems to place them in, demonstrating strength not just in
  battle, but in wisdom, endurance, and healing .

### Queer Readings: The Fellowship of Frodo and Sam

While the book contains no explicitly queer characters, many modern
readers and scholars have explored the powerful same-sex relationships
and their queer subtext.

- **An Idealized Heroic Friendship:** The emotional core of the entire
  epic is the relationship between Frodo and Sam. Tolkien, drawing on
  his wartime experience, modeled their bond on the intensely loyal and
  intimate relationship between a British officer and his batman (a
  military servant) .

- **Homoerotic Subtext:** The depth of their devotion, their physical
  intimacy, and their emotional dependency—especially as depicted in
  Peter Jackson's films—has led to powerful queer readings of their
  relationship . Lines like Frodo's "I am glad you are with me. Here at
  the end of all things" are seen as expressions of a profound love that
  transcends the boundaries of conventional male friendship . These
  interpretations do not necessarily claim the characters are gay in a
  modern sense but highlight the homoerotic potential within the text,
  offering a valid and meaningful perspective for LGBTQ+ readers and
  allies .

### Quotes That Hit Different: A Multilingual Collection

Some lines from *The Lord of the Rings* have become part of our global
culture, offering inspiration and wisdom. Here are a few, along with
their translations, showing how their power travels across languages.

**For Hope and Friendship:**

- "All we have to decide is what to do with the time that is given us."
  — Gandalf

- "There's some good in this world, Mr. Frodo... and it's worth fighting
  for." — Sam

  - **Polish:** *Jest trochę dobra na tym świecie i o to dobro warto
    walczyć.*

- "I can't carry it for you, but I can carry you!" — Sam

**For Your Yearbook or Instagram:**

- "Not all those who wander are lost." — Bilbo (in a poem about Aragorn)

  - **German:** *Nicht jeder, der wandert, verlorn.*

- "All that is gold does not glitter." — Bilbo (from the same poem)

  - **German:** *Nicht alles, was Gold ist, funkelt.*

The Ring Verse:

The most famous poem in the book, its translation reveals different
poetic choices in each language.

**Table 2: The Ring Verse in Multiple Languages**

| Language | Translation of the Ring Verse | Source |
|----|----|----|
| **English** | Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky, Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone, Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die, One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. |  |
| **Polish** (Skibniewska) | *Trzy Pierścienie dla królów Elfów pod otwartym niebem,* *Siedem dla władców krasnali w ich kamiennych pałacach,* *Dziewięć dla śmiertelników, ludzi śmierci podległych,* *Jeden dla Władcy Ciemności na czarnym tronie* *W Krainie Mordor, gdzie zaległy cienie.* *Jeden, by wszystkimi rządzić, Jeden, by wszystkie odnaleźć,* *Jeden, by wszystkie zgromadzić i w ciemności związać* *W Krainie Mordor, gdzie zaległy cienie.* |  |
| **French** | *Trois Anneaux pour les Rois Elfes sous le ciel,* *Sept pour les Seigneurs Nains dans leurs demeures de pierre,* *Neuf pour les Hommes Mortels destinés au trépas,* *Un pour le Seigneur des Ténèbres sur son sombre trône* *Au Pays de Mordor où s'étendent les Ombres.* *Un Anneau pour les gouverner tous, Un Anneau pour les trouver,* *Un Anneau pour les amener tous et dans les ténèbres les lier* *Au Pays de Mordor où s'étendent les Ombres.* |  |
| **German** (Krege) | *Drei Ringe den Elbenkönigen hoch im Licht,* *Sieben den Zwergenherrschern in ihren Hallen aus Stein,* *Den Sterblichen, ewig dem Tode verfallen, neun,* *Einer dem Dunklen Herrn auf dunklem Thron* *Im Lande Mordor, wo die Schatten drohn.* *Ein Ring, sie zu knechten, sie alle zu finden,* *Ins Dunkel zu treiben und ewig zu binden* *Im Lande Mordor, wo die Schatten drohn.* |  |

**Warning: Common Misquotes:** Many famous lines are from the Peter
Jackson films, not the book. For example, Gandalf never says, "A wizard
is never late, Frodo Baggins. He arrives precisely when he means to." In
the book, he simply apologizes for being late.

## Conclusion: The Road Goes Ever On

The journey of *The Lord of the Rings* from a private hobby of an Oxford
professor to a global cultural touchstone is as epic as any quest within
its pages. It is a story of accident and intention, of an author's
deep-seated beliefs and a world of readers who found their own meanings
in his creation. It survived the skepticism of the literary elite, was
propelled to fame by a pirate paperback, and was adopted by successive
generations who reinterpreted it through the lens of their own cultures,
politics, and media.

The book is not a static artifact. It is a living text, constantly being
debated and re-read. Its complex legacy regarding race and gender
invites critical engagement rather than simple acceptance, challenging
modern readers to grapple with the history embedded in our most beloved
stories. Its themes of friendship, loyalty, and hope in the face of
overwhelming despair have proven powerfully universal, resonating just
as strongly with a Gen Z reader on TikTok as they did with a student on
a 1960s college campus or a dissident in the Soviet Union.

Ultimately, the book endures because it speaks to a fundamental human
truth: that the world is full of peril, and in it there are many dark
places, but that the smallest person, armed with courage and the loyalty
of friends, can change the course of the future. For a generation facing
unprecedented global challenges, from climate change to political
division, that message is more vital than ever. The road of this story
goes ever on, and new generations will continue to walk it, finding
their own paths and discovering their own truths along the way.

## Appendix: How to Spot Good Sources (A Guide for Students)

When you're writing an essay or just trying to win an argument online,
using good sources is your superpower. It shows you've done your
homework and makes people take you seriously. Here’s a quick guide to
telling the good from the bad and the ugly.

### 🟢 Trust these sources:

- **University Websites and Presses (.edu,.ac.uk, etc.):** These are
  academic institutions. Books and articles published by university
  presses (like Oxford University Press) have been heavily vetted by
  experts.

- **Peer-Reviewed Journals:** These are the gold standard for academic
  research. Articles are reviewed by other experts in the field before
  publication to check for accuracy and quality. Databases like JSTOR,
  Project MUSE, or Google Scholar often label these sources.

- **Published Academic Books with an ISBN:** Look for books from
  reputable academic publishers. They will have been through a rigorous
  editing and fact-checking process.

- **Major Museums and Cultural Institutions:** Organizations like
  national libraries or major museums are reliable sources for
  historical and cultural information.

- **Author's Official Estate or Foundation:** The Tolkien Estate's
  official website is a primary source for information directly from the
  author's family and archives.

- **🇵🇱 Polish Trusted Sources:** Websites like **Culture.pl**, the
  **Instytut Książki** (Book Institute), and the digital collections of
  the **Biblioteka Narodowa** (National Library) at **polona.pl** are
  excellent for verified information on Polish culture. University
  repositories (e.g., from Jagiellonian University, University of
  Warsaw) and academic databases like **BazHum** and **CEJSH** are
  top-tier for Polish scholarship.

### 🟡 Use with caution:

- **Wikipedia:** It's a fantastic starting point to get an overview of a
  topic, but it's not a primary source. ALWAYS scroll to the bottom and
  check the sources listed in the "References" section. Cite those
  sources, not Wikipedia itself.

- **Reputable News Outlets and Magazines (e.g., *The Guardian*, *The New
  York Times*, *The Smithsonian*):** These are generally reliable for
  contemporary reception and cultural impact, but be aware they are
  written for a general audience, not an academic one. Always check the
  date, as reporting can become outdated.

- **YouTube Video Essays and BookTube Reviews:** The quality varies
  wildly. Check the creator's credentials. Do they cite their sources in
  the description? Are they a recognized scholar in the field, or are
  they just sharing opinions? Use them for ideas, but find an academic
  source to back up their claims.

- **🇵🇱 Polish Popular Sources:** Sites like **Lubimyczytać.pl** are
  great for seeing reader reviews and popularity ratings, but treat them
  as opinion, not fact. Student forums can be useful for seeing how a
  topic is discussed, but the information needs to be verified
  elsewhere.

### 🔴 Avoid these:

- **Anonymous Blog Posts or Forum Comments without Sources:** If you
  can't tell who wrote it and they don't say where they got their
  information, you can't trust it.

- **AI-Generated Content without Human Verification:** AI tools can be
  helpful for brainstorming, but they can also "hallucinate" or make up
  facts and sources. Never cite an AI directly.

- **Clickbait "Top 10" Lists:** Sites filled with ads and sensational
  headlines are usually designed to get clicks, not provide accurate
  information. If they don't cite sources for their "facts," ignore
  them.

- **Outdated Websites:** If a site hasn't been updated since the early
  2000s, the information may be superseded by more recent scholarship.

- **🇵🇱 Polish Warning:** Be very careful with student "cheat sheet"
  sites like Bryk.pl. They are notorious for containing errors,
  oversimplifications, and sometimes outright plagiarism. They are not
  acceptable sources for schoolwork.

**Pro Tip:** If a fact sounds too wild to be true (like "Tolkien
invented the word 'dwarf'"), find at least two or three different
reliable sources that confirm it before you use it. Good research is
like being a detective—you have to follow the clues and verify your
evidence!

## Bibliography

### A. Primary Sources

1.  Tolkien, J.R.R. *The Fellowship of the Ring*. London: George Allen &
    Unwin, 1954. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

2.  Tolkien, J.R.R. *The Two Towers*. London: George Allen &
    Unwin, 1954. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

3.  Tolkien, J.R.R. *The Return of the King*. London: George Allen &
    Unwin, 1955. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

4.  Tolkien, J.R.R. *The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien*. Edited by Humphrey
    Carpenter with Christopher Tolkien, London: George Allen &
    Unwin, 1981. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

5.  Tolkien, J.R.R. "Guide to the Names in The Lord of the Rings." In *A
    Tolkien Compass*, edited by Jared Lobdell. La Salle, Illinois: Open
    Court, 1975. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

6.  J.R.R. Tolkien Collection, Marquette University Archives, Milwaukee,
    Wisconsin. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

### B. Secondary Sources

#### Academic Sources (Peer-Reviewed)

7.  Fimi, Dimitra. *Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to
    Hobbits*. Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

8.  Honegger, Thomas, ed. *Tolkien in Translation*. Walking Tree
    Publishers, 2003. (Contains analyses of French, German, and other
    translations). ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

9.  Hooker, Mark T. *Tolkien Through Russian Eyes*. Walking Tree
    Publishers, 2003. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

10. Maddox, Rachel. "Flawed and Formidable: Galadriel, Éowyn, and
    Tolkien’s Inadvertent Feminism." *UReCA: The NCHC Journal of
    Undergraduate Research & Creative Activity*, 2018. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

11. Mendro, Hannah. "Strange and Comforting: The Friendship of Legolas
    and Gimli." *Mythlore*, vol. 39, no. 2, 2021, pp. 141-158. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

12. Mucha, Aleksandra. "Translational Challenges and Problems Concerning
    Culture-Rooted Elements in Andrzej Sapkowski's Fantasy Works."
    *Między Oryginałem a Przekładem*, vol. 24, no. 42, 2018, pp. 55-73.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

13. Neubauer, Łukasz. "The 'Polish Inkling': Professor Przemyslaw
    Mroczkowski as J.R.R. Tolkien's Friend and Scholar." *Mythlore*,
    vol. 39, no. 1, 2020, pp. 149-166. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

14. Reinders, Eric. *Reading Tolkien in Chinese: Religion, Fantasy and
    Translation*. Bloomsbury Academic, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

15. Shippey, Tom. *The Road to Middle-Earth: Revised and Expanded
    Edition*. HarperCollins, 2005. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

16. Stuart, Robert. *Tolkien, Race, and Racism in Middle-earth*.
    Palgrave Macmillan, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

17. Vaccaro, Christopher. "Queer Lodgings: Gender and Sexuality in The
    Lord of the Rings." *Mallorn: The Journal of the Tolkien Society*,
    no. 43, 2005, pp. 11-18. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

18. Varvounis, Miltiades. *Jan Sobieski: The King Who Saved Europe*.
    Winged Hussar Publishing, 2012. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

19. Whittingham, Elizabeth A. *The Evolution of Tolkien's Mythology: A
    Study of the History of Middle-earth*. McFarland, 2017. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

20. Yilmaz, Dr. Emrah. "The Lord of the Rings and the Holy Quran."
    *Journal of History Culture and Art Research*, vol. 2, no. 2, 2013,
    pp. 208-213. ⭐⭐⭐

21. Zhang, Fan. "An Analysis of the Female Images in Tolkien's Works:
    Galadriel, Éowyn, and Arwen." *Journal of Education, Humanities and
    Social Sciences*, vol. 10, 2023, pp. 72-74. ⭐⭐⭐

#### Popular and Digital Sources (Books, Articles, Websites)

22. "Adaptations of The Lord of the Rings." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia
    Foundation, Accessed July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

23. Arduini, Roberto. "Japan: Reception of Tolkien." In *J.R.R. Tolkien
    Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment*, edited by
    Michael D.C. Drout, Routledge, 2006, pp. 310-311. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

24. Berglind, Ashley. "The Female Presence in Tolkien's Masculine
    World." *e-Publications@Marquette*, 2018. ⭐⭐⭐

25. "Christianity in Middle-earth." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation,
    Accessed July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

26. "Constructing The Lord of the Rings." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia
    Foundation, Accessed July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

27. Doughan, David. "J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biographical Sketch." *The
    Tolkien Society*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

28. Edwards, Jasmine. "The 10 Most Memeable Moments in The Lord of the
    Rings." *Sideshow*, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

29. Farrell, John. "A Race-Conscious Critique of *The Lord of the Rings*
    Films." *The Manitoban*, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

30. Fisher, Ellen. "An analysis of Tolkien's use of Old English language
    to create the personal names of key characters in The Lord of the
    Rings..." *Innervate*, vol. 6, 2013-2014, pp. 21-34. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

31. García-Ferreras, Alicia. "Traducción y recepción de la obra de
    ficción de J. R. R. Tolkien en España y América Latina." *1611:
    Revista de historia de la traducción*, no. 16, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

32. Grushnetskiy, Vladimir. "How Russians See Tolkien." *Mythlore*, vol.
    21, no. 2, 1996. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

33. "J.R.R. Tolkien." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation, Accessed July
    25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

34. "Literary reception of The Lord of the Rings." *Wikipedia*,
    Wikimedia Foundation, Accessed July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

35. "Maria Skibniewska." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation, Accessed
    July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

36. Markova, Olga. "Russia: Reception of Tolkien." In *J.R.R. Tolkien
    Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment*, edited by
    Michael D.C. Drout, Routledge, 2006, pp. 580-581. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

37. "Mordor, Warsaw." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation, Accessed July
    25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

38. "Polish speculative fiction." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation,
    Accessed July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

39. "Sexuality in The Lord of the Rings." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia
    Foundation, Accessed July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

40. "The Lord of the Rings." *Britannica*, Accessed July 25, 2025.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

41. "The Lord of the Rings." *Tolkien Estate*, Accessed July 25, 2025.
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

42. "The Lord of the Rings." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation, Accessed
    July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

43. "The Lord of the Rings (film series)." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia
    Foundation, Accessed July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

44. "Tolkien and race." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation, Accessed July
    25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

45. "Tolkien tourism." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation, Accessed July
    25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐

46. "Translating The Lord of the Rings." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia
    Foundation, Accessed July 25, 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

47. Van Maren, Jonathon. "When Middle-earth came to Vienna." *The
    European Conservative*, December 20, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐

48. "Władca Pierścieni." *Wikipedia Polska*, Wikimedia Foundation,
    Accessed July 25, 2025. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

49. "Władca Pierścieni. Drużyna Pierścienia w kanonie lektur szkolnych!"
    *Ostatnia Tawerna*, August 9, 2007. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐

50. "Gandalf and Tolkien Streets opened in Warsaw district nicknamed
    'Mordor'." *Notes From Poland*, January 11, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

### C. Missing Sources Note

- **Quantitative Data on Polish Fandom:** While the cultural impact is
  well-documented qualitatively, specific statistics on book sales in
  Poland over the decades, membership numbers for Polish Tolkien
  societies, or detailed analytics from Polish fan forums (e.g.,
  Elendilion.pl) were not available in the provided materials.

- **Reception in Africa, South America (excluding Argentina/Brazil), and
  South Asia:** Academic scholarship on the reception and translation of
  *The Lord of the Rings* in these vast regions is lacking in the
  provided sources. Further research would be needed to understand how
  the book was received in countries like India, Nigeria, or Colombia.

- **Matura Exam Appearances:** While the book's presence in the Polish
  school curriculum is confirmed, specific data on how many times
  questions about *The Lord of the Rings* have appeared on the Polish
  *matura* (final high school exam) and in which years could not be
  verified. This would require direct analysis of Polish Ministry of
  Education exam archives.

- **Non-Binary and Transgender Readings:** While queer readings focusing
  on same-sex relationships are documented, specific academic analyses
  of the text through a non-binary or transgender lens were not present
  in the research material and represent an area for future scholarship.

#### Cytowane prace

1.  J.R.R. Tolkien Collection // Archives // Raynor Library // Marquette
    University, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.marquette.edu/library/archives/tolkien.php</u>](https://www.marquette.edu/library/archives/tolkien.php)

2.  Lista lektur obowiązkowych i uzupełniających w szkole ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://spsokolowice.szkolnastrona.pl/a,652,lista-lektur-obowiazkowych-i-uzupelniajacych-w-szkole-podstawowej</u>](https://spsokolowice.szkolnastrona.pl/a,652,lista-lektur-obowiazkowych-i-uzupelniajacych-w-szkole-podstawowej)
