# The Doll That Conquered the World: An International Perspective on Bolesław Prus's ***Lalka***

## Part I: The Phenomenon of ***Lalka***

### 1.1 Why This 19th-Century Book is All Over Your TikTok Feed: An Introduction

It is one of the great paradoxes of modern literary culture: a dense,
700-page Polish novel from the 19th century, filled with complex social
critique and historical trauma, has become an inexhaustible source of
memes, fan edits, and intense debate for a new generation.<sup>1</sup>
On platforms like TikTok, under hashtags like

\#lalkaedit, characters who lived and died in a Warsaw that no longer
exists are brought back to life, set to modern music and reinterpreted
through the lens of 21st-century psychology.<sup>3</sup> This is the
strange, vibrant afterlife of

*Lalka*, or *The Doll*, by Bolesław Prus.

At its core, the novel tells the story of Stanisław Wokulski, a
brilliant, self-made man of action, a merchant and scientist who
embodies the forward-looking ideals of his era.<sup>5</sup> Yet, this
man of immense will and intellect is brought to his knees by a
destructive, all-consuming romantic obsession with Izabela Łęcka, a
breathtakingly beautiful but emotionally vacant aristocrat who is the
living embodiment of a dying social order.<sup>7</sup> Their story
unfolds against a panoramic backdrop of Warsaw in 1878-1879, a city
teeming with life but suffocating under foreign rule.<sup>6</sup>

To understand the phenomenon of *Lalka* is to understand its towering
stature in its homeland. For many Poles, including the Nobel
Prize-winning poet Czesław Miłosz, it is simply "the greatest Polish
novel".<sup>9</sup> Prus's biographer Zygmunt Szweykowski went further,
suggesting it may be unique in all of 19th-century world literature for
its comprehensive, compelling, and unflinching portrait of an entire
society.<sup>9</sup> It is a work that functions simultaneously as a
tragic love story, a psychological deep-dive, a sweeping social
panorama, and a coded political statement.

This report explores the remarkable journey of *Lalka*, tracing its path
from a serialized newspaper story in a censored, partitioned Poland to
its current status as a globally reinterpreted masterpiece. It will
investigate how a novel so deeply rooted in a specific national
trauma—the pain of a nation erased from the map—can transcend its
origins to speak powerfully to international audiences. It will analyze
how new generations, armed with digital tools and modern sensibilities,
are finding new meanings in its pages, proving that the greatest stories
are not static monuments but living conversations that evolve with every
new reader.

### 1.2 Mind-Blown Moments & The Author's Secret Life

The man who created this intricate world was no cloistered academic.
Bolesław Prus, born Aleksander Głowacki, lived a life marked by profound
trauma and intellectual rigor, experiences that are baked into the very
DNA of his novel.<sup>10</sup> To understand

*Lalka*, one must first understand the secret life of its author.

**The Author Was a Child Soldier:** Before he was a celebrated writer,
Aleksander Głowacki was a teenage insurgent. At the age of just 15, he
ran away from school to join the 1863 January Uprising, a doomed Polish
rebellion against the Russian Empire.<sup>12</sup> Shortly after his
16th birthday, he was severely wounded in battle, suffering head
injuries and contusions, and was captured by Russian
forces.<sup>12</sup> He was subsequently imprisoned in the infamous
Lublin Castle.<sup>14</sup> This early exposure to violence, failure,
and imprisonment left indelible scars; Prus suffered from lifelong panic
attacks and agoraphobia (a fear of open spaces), which may have stemmed
directly from these traumatic events.<sup>13</sup> This personal history
of idealism shattered by brutal reality is the psychological engine that
drives his protagonist, Stanisław Wokulski.

**The Novel Was Inspired by a Stolen Toy:** The grand, epic sweep of
*Lalka* had a surprisingly mundane origin. Prus himself revealed that
the initial spark for the novel, and its title, came from a brief news
report he read about a court case in Vienna.<sup>16</sup> The lawsuit
involved a young woman accused of stealing a toy doll—a minor incident
that Prus transformed into a pivotal subplot and a powerful,
multi-layered symbol for the entire work.<sup>18</sup> This contrast
between the small, everyday trigger and the novel's vast thematic scope
is a hallmark of Prus's genius.

**It Was the "Netflix Series" of Its Day:** *Lalka* was not written as a
complete book and then published. Like many great 19th-century novels
(think Dickens), it was composed for periodical
serialization.<sup>9</sup> It appeared in installments in the Warsaw
newspaper

*Kurier Codzienny* (The Daily Courier) between September 29, 1887, and
May 1889.<sup>1</sup> This method of creation influenced its structure,
which is often episodic and full of narrative hooks designed to keep
readers buying the next day's paper. The city of Warsaw followed the
fates of Wokulski and Izabela with the same anticipation modern
audiences might follow a weekly streaming series.

**A Third of the Original Manuscript Is Lost Forever:** The physical
text that Prus wrote is now a precious and incomplete artifact. After
the author's death, his wife, Oktawia Głowacka, donated a portion of the
original manuscript to the Warsaw Public Library. That portion—roughly
one-third of the complete novel—survives and is housed there to this
day. The fate of the remaining two-thirds of the manuscript is unknown;
it is considered lost to history.<sup>20</sup> This loss lends an air of
mystery to the novel's creation and makes the surviving pages an
invaluable part of Poland's national heritage.

### 1.3 Fact-Checking Lalka: Debunking the Myths

Like any great classic, *Lalka* has accumulated its share of myths and
oversimplifications. Getting to the truth provides a clearer foundation
for understanding the novel's true complexity.

Myth 1: The title "The Doll" refers only to Izabela Łęcka.

Fact: This is the most common interpretation, and it is certainly a
valid one. Izabela is frequently described as cold, beautiful, and
hollow, like a "society doll" or a "porcelain doll".5 However, Prus
himself stated that the title was directly inspired by the literal toy
doll from the court case he read about.16 The novel supports multiple
symbolic readings of the title. It can refer to the mechanical toys in
Ignacy Rzecki's shop window, which he manipulates like a god, suggesting
a world where humans are mere puppets of fate or social forces.23 It
also connects to the broader theme of the "theatre of the world," where
all the characters are "lalki" (puppets) playing assigned roles, unable
to break free from the script of their social class and time.1

Myth 2: Bolesław Prus was just a novelist.

Fact: Prus was, for most of his life, primarily a journalist and public
intellectual. His 40-year career as a newspaper columnist made him one
of Warsaw's most prominent voices.10 He was a leading advocate for
Polish Positivism, a philosophical movement that urged Poles to achieve
progress through science, technology, and economic development rather
than through failed military uprisings.1 He was deeply influenced by
Western thinkers like Herbert Spencer and John Stuart Mill and even
delivered public lectures on the importance of scientific discoveries
and inventions.10 He began writing fiction almost as a "sideline" to his
main journalistic work, using it to explore the societal issues he wrote
about in his columns.25

Myth 3: The novel's original title was Lalka.

Fact: Prus's intended title for the novel was Trzy Pokolenia (Three
Generations).9 This original title reveals his primary authorial
intention much more clearly than the one he eventually settled on. His
goal was to "present our Polish idealists against the background of
social decay" by contrasting three distinct generational worldviews.18
These are embodied by: Ignacy Rzecki, the old clerk who represents the
bygone era of Romanticism and Napoleonic idealism; Stanisław Wokulski,
the man of the present caught between Romantic impulses and Positivist
pragmatism; and Julian Ochocki, the young scientist who represents the
future and the pure, forward-looking pursuit of scientific progress.1
The shift in title to the more ambiguous

*Lalka* may have been a commercial decision, but the original title
unlocks the novel's core intellectual structure.

The very genesis of the novel reveals the core tension that makes it a
masterpiece. The author's personal history is one of immense, violent,
"Romantic" trauma—a failed national uprising, wounds,
imprisonment.<sup>12</sup> His professional life, however, was one of
meticulous, "Positivist" observation as a journalist documenting the
minute details of everyday Warsaw life.<sup>10</sup> The novel
brilliantly fuses these two realities. It stages the grand, internal
dramas of its characters—their historical traumas, their soaring
passions, their existential crises—against a backdrop of painstakingly
rendered social and economic reality. The origin of the title is not
just a piece of trivia; it is a perfect microcosm of this method. Prus
found the seed of an epic tragedy not in a grand historical event, but
in a mundane newspaper clipping about a toy.<sup>17</sup> He
demonstrates that the great dramas of a nation and the human soul are
not separate from the fabric of daily life, but are woven directly into
it.

## Part II: A World in Flux: Warsaw, 1878-1879

To read *Lalka* without understanding its setting is to see only a
fraction of its meaning. The novel is inextricably bound to a specific
time and place: Warsaw in the late 1870s. This was not just any European
capital; it was the heart of a nation that had been erased from the map,
a crucible of conflicting ideologies, and a city haunted by the ghosts
of its past. The "where" and "when" of this story are characters in
their own right.

### 2.1 Between Empires and Ideas: The Historical Crucible

The action of *Lalka* unfolds in a city under occupation. In the late
19th century, Poland did not exist as an independent state; its
territory had been carved up and absorbed by three neighboring powers:
Russia, Prussia, and Austria.<sup>27</sup> Warsaw was the administrative
center of the "Vistula Land," the part of Poland under the rule of the
Russian Empire.<sup>6</sup> This fundamental political reality—of being
a nation without a state—is the source of the novel's pervasive
atmosphere of stagnation, frustration, and what Prus called "social
decay".<sup>9</sup>

The characters are not just individuals; they are living repositories of
historical trauma. Their lives and ideologies are defined by the
collective memory of failed national uprisings. The most recent and raw
of these was the **January Uprising of 1863**. This bloody, unsuccessful
rebellion against Russia is the defining event for the protagonist,
Stanisław Wokulski. His participation led to his arrest and exile to
Siberia, a fate that transformed him from a young idealist into a
hardened man of action.<sup>1</sup> The older generation is represented
by Ignacy Rzecki, whose entire worldview is shaped by even earlier
events: the

**Spring of Nations in 1848** and his unwavering, almost religious
belief in the Napoleonic legend as a source of Polish
liberation.<sup>1</sup> Even the

**November Uprising of 1830** echoes in the memories of the oldest
characters.<sup>29</sup> These are not merely historical footnotes; they
are the psychological wounds that dictate the characters' hopes, fears,
and ultimate limitations.

This history of failed Romantic revolts gave rise to a new intellectual
movement in Poland: **Positivism**. Rejecting what they saw as the
futile and destructive path of armed struggle, Polish Positivists argued
that the nation should be strengthened from within through "organic
work" (*praca organiczna*) and "work at the foundations" (*praca u
podstaw*).<sup>1</sup> They promoted pragmatism, education, scientific
advancement, and economic development as the true path to national
survival.

*Lalka* is set at a crucial moment of disillusionment known as the
**crisis of Positivism**.<sup>18</sup> The optimistic ideals of the
movement were crashing against the hard reality of a deeply conservative
and stratified society that resisted change. Wokulski is the perfect
embodiment of this crisis. He is a man who follows the Positivist script
to the letter—he studies science, he becomes a brilliant entrepreneur,
he builds a fortune—only to find that his success earns him the contempt
of the aristocracy and brings him no closer to personal
fulfillment.<sup>1</sup>

### 2.2 The City as a Character: A Literary Tour of Prus's Warsaw

Prus's Warsaw is one of the most vividly realized urban landscapes in
literature. The novel is not just set in the city; it is a "literary
guide" to its very streets, buildings, and social geography.<sup>5</sup>
The author's depiction is so topographically precise that for decades
after its publication, it was possible to use the book as a map,
identifying the exact locations of Wokulski's shop, his apartment, and
the homes of other characters.<sup>9</sup> This meticulous realism has
led many to declare that Warsaw is itself one of the novel's main
characters <sup>5</sup> and to compare Prus's achievement to what James
Joyce did for Dublin in

*Ulysses* or Charles Dickens did for London.<sup>5</sup>

A reader can take a virtual tour of the city alongside the characters.
We walk the grand **Krakowskie Przedmieście**, the city's most
prestigious thoroughfare, where Wokulski's luxurious store is located
and where the aristocracy parades.<sup>18</sup> We descend into the
impoverished riverside district of

**Powiśle**, a world of poverty and squalor that shocks Wokulski and
fuels his philanthropic impulses.<sup>18</sup> We stroll through the
elegant

**Łazienki Park** for clandestine meetings and attend high-society
events at real locations like the National Theatre and St. Joseph's
Church.<sup>18</sup>

This geography is also a map of the city's rigid social hierarchy. The
novel constantly contrasts the opulent, glittering world of aristocratic
salons with the desperate poverty of the city's underclass, showing how
these different social strata inhabit parallel universes within the same
physical space.<sup>18</sup> This powerful sense of place has had a
lasting cultural impact. To this day, literary walking tours tracing the
footsteps of

*Lalka*'s characters are a popular cultural activity in Warsaw, allowing
Poles and tourists alike to connect with this lost 19th-century
world.<sup>1</sup>

### 2.3 The Censor's Shadow: Reading the Absences

One of the most startling features of Prus's hyper-realistic novel is
what is conspicuously missing. Despite being set in a city under decades
of Russian military and administrative control, the novel contains
virtually no direct mention of the Russian presence.<sup>34</sup> There
are no Russian soldiers patrolling the streets, no Orthodox churches
dotting the skyline, and no discussion of the official policy of
Russification that sought to stamp out Polish culture.<sup>18</sup>

This gaping absence is not an oversight; it is a masterful use of
**Aesopian language**—a set of coded techniques and strategic omissions
that writers in the Russian Empire used to bypass the state
censor.<sup>34</sup> Prus knew that any overt criticism of the ruling
power or depiction of the occupation's reality would ensure his novel
was never published. He therefore entered into a "specific contract
between writer and reader".<sup>34</sup> Polish readers of the time,
living that reality every day, would have understood the oppressive
context implicitly. They could read between the lines and feel the
weight of the occupation in the novel's atmosphere of inertia and
hopelessness without it ever being named.

For international readers, understanding this censorship is crucial. It
reveals that the novel is far more political than it appears on the
surface. The first book edition of 1890 was even more heavily censored
than the original newspaper serials, with the Tsarist authorities
removing explicit references to Wokulski's exile in Siberia and the
patriotic uprisings that led him there.<sup>18</sup> The full,
uncensored text as we know it today was only restored by scholars in the
20th century.<sup>18</sup>

The novel's famous realism, particularly its obsessive focus on Warsaw's
topography, can be seen as a profound political act of resistance. At a
time when the Russian Empire was actively working to erase Polish
identity, Prus's meticulous documentation of the city's Polish character
served as a powerful act of cultural preservation. By mapping Warsaw's
streets, social life, and landmarks in such indelible detail, he was
creating a permanent record of a Polish cultural space that the
occupiers sought to redefine and control. While direct political speech
was forbidden, this act of "cartographic nationalism" asserted Polish
ownership of the city through literature. The novel's realism is
therefore not merely descriptive; it is defiant. It preserves a mental
and cultural map for a nation that had been politically erased, a subtle
act of resistance that continues today in the literary walking tours
that reclaim Warsaw's streets for Prus's characters.

## Part III: Decoding ***Lalka***: Symbolism, Psychology, and Ideology

Beyond its historical context, *Lalka* is a novel of immense
psychological and philosophical depth. It is a work built on layers of
symbolism, populated by characters who embody the great ideological
struggles of their time, and who have proven endlessly fascinating to
modern readers armed with new psychological frameworks. To decode
*Lalka* is to enter a world of profound contradictions, where love looks
like obsession, idealism leads to ruin, and a simple toy can represent
the fate of the universe.

### 3.1 The Title and Its Meanings: More Than Just a Doll

The novel's title, *Lalka* (The Doll), is a masterpiece of ambiguity,
operating on at least four distinct symbolic levels.

1.  **The Literal Doll:** The most direct reference is to a lawsuit over
    a stolen toy doll, an actual event Prus read about in a newspaper
    and incorporated into his plot.<sup>16</sup> This seemingly minor
    subplot provides the novel with its title and serves as a reminder
    of Prus's method of finding grand themes in mundane reality.

2.  **Izabela, the "Society Doll":** This is the most popular and
    immediate interpretation. Izabela Łęcka, with her stunning beauty,
    aristocratic coldness, and emotional emptiness, is seen as a living
    "doll".<sup>5</sup> She is a perfect, inanimate object of desire, a
    product of her class designed for display but lacking inner life and
    agency. As one character remarks, she is a "society doll," beautiful
    but hollow.<sup>23</sup>

3.  **The Mechanical Toys and a Clockwork Universe:** A more profound
    symbol lies in the mechanical toys that the old clerk, Ignacy
    Rzecki, lovingly arranges in the shop window.<sup>23</sup> He winds
    them up and watches them play out their repetitive, predetermined
    movements. These scenes function as a powerful metaphor for a
    deterministic universe where the novel's characters are like
    clockwork figures, tossed about by forces beyond their control—be it
    fate, history, or social class.<sup>23</sup> This reflects the
    scientific and philosophical debates of the 19th century about free
    will versus determinism.

4.  **The Theatre of the World:** Expanding on the previous point, the
    title suggests that all the characters are *lalki*—puppets or
    marionettes—on the stage of life.<sup>1</sup> They are actors
    playing out roles assigned to them by society. The aristocrats play
    at being aristocrats, the merchants play at being merchants, and no
    one can break free from their script. This interpretation aligns
    with the novel's deep critique of social determinism and the inertia
    that prevents genuine change.

### 3.2 Wokulski: The Proto-Modern Man

Stanisław Wokulski is one of literature's great transitional figures, a
man caught between eras and riddled with contradictions. He is the heart
of the novel's psychological complexity.

- **A Man of Contradictions:** Wokulski is torn between the two great
  ideologies of his time. His soul is that of a **Romantic**: he is
  passionate, idealistic, and capable of a self-destructive love that
  defies all logic, recalling the great tragic lovers of Polish Romantic
  literature.<sup>1</sup> Yet his actions are those of a  
  **Positivist**: he is a brilliant scientist, a pragmatic businessman,
  and a believer in progress and hard work.<sup>15</sup> He is a
  successful man of action by day and a tormented dreamer by night. This
  internal conflict makes him a deeply modern, fragmented character who
  cannot find peace in either worldview.

- **Modern Psychological Readings:** Today's readers, especially young
  ones, often bypass the 19th-century ideological labels and apply
  modern psychological frameworks to Wokulski, finding him intensely
  relatable.

  - **Clinical Depression:** A widespread contemporary reading
    interprets Wokulski not as a tragic Romantic hero, but as a man
    suffering from severe, untreated **depression**.<sup>5</sup> His
    suicidal attempt on the train tracks, his feelings of emotional
    emptiness, his social withdrawal, and his reckless financial
    decisions are seen as clear symptoms of a serious mental health
    crisis.<sup>5</sup>

  - **The "Simp":** In the blunt parlance of internet culture, Wokulski
    is often labeled a **"simp"**—a man who debases himself and does far
    too much for a woman who shows him little to no
    affection.<sup>5</sup> This anachronistic but insightful label
    captures the frustrating and pathological nature of his one-sided
    devotion to Izabela.

- **International Parallels:** Wokulski stands alongside the great
  figures of world literature. His social climbing and vast fortune
  built for the love of an unattainable woman make him a clear precursor
  to F. Scott Fitzgerald's **Jay Gatsby**.<sup>8</sup> His internal
  struggles and panoramic social setting draw comparisons to the heroes
  of Tolstoy and Balzac, while his meticulous, almost scientific
  observation of the world around him echoes the realism of Dickens and
  Flaubert.<sup>5</sup>

### 3.3 The Women of ***Lalka***: Victims, Vamps, or Visionaries?

The novel's female characters are as complex as its men, sparking fierce
debate among readers about their roles and motivations.

- **Deconstructing Izabela:** It is easy to dismiss Izabela Łęcka as the
  villain of the story—a cold, cruel "femme fatale".<sup>5</sup> But a
  more nuanced reading, popular among modern audiences, sees her as a  
  **prisoner of her time and class**.<sup>5</sup> Raised to be nothing
  more than a beautiful object for a prestigious marriage, she has
  almost no agency. Her world is one of salons and suitors; she has no
  education, no profession, and no path in life other than the one
  prescribed by her aristocratic background. Her inability to love
  Wokulski stems not just from snobbery, but from a genuine inability to
  comprehend his world of work, science, and raw passion. She is a
  tragic figure, as much a victim of the social system as Wokulski is.

- **The Proto-Feminist, Kazimiera Wąsowska:** In stark contrast to
  Izabela stands the wealthy, intelligent, and fiercely independent
  widow, Kazimiera Wąsowska. She is a woman who actively defies the
  conventions of her time. She is sexually liberated, intellectually
  curious, and mocks the foolishness of the men around her. Many readers
  see her as a **proto-feminist icon**.<sup>35</sup> She understands
  Wokulski's worth, challenges his destructive obsession with Izabela,
  and offers him a vision of a partnership based on mutual respect and
  intellectual equality—a vision he is too blind to accept.<sup>5</sup>

- **Problematic Elements: Misogyny and Antisemitism:** It is impossible
  to discuss *Lalka* without confronting its problematic aspects. The
  novel is saturated with the **misogyny** of its era. Wokulski, the
  supposed hero, voices some of the most offensive sentiments, at one
  point concluding that "every white angel is one-tenth a
  prostitute".<sup>5</sup> The book also serves as a stark document of
  the rising  
  **antisemitism** in late 19th-century Warsaw. While some Jewish
  characters are portrayed sympathetically, the text is filled with
  antisemitic stereotypes and reflects a growing social
  hostility.<sup>5</sup> Prus chronicles these ugly prejudices with the
  unflinching eye of a realist. For modern readers, grappling with these
  "mega niesmaczne" (super distasteful) passages is a crucial part of
  engaging with the novel critically, separating the author's
  documentation of societal attitudes from the characters'
  voices.<sup>5</sup>

### 3.4 Rzecki: The Bonapartist Dreamer and Queer Icon

Perhaps the most beloved character in the novel is Ignacy Rzecki, the
old clerk whose diary provides the story with its second heart.

- **The Diary as a Second Novel:** The inclusion of Rzecki's "Pamiętnik
  starego subiekta" (The Diary of an Old Clerk) is a stroke of
  structural genius. It provides a completely different narrative voice:
  first-person, subjective, deeply nostalgic, and touchingly
  naive.<sup>5</sup> Rzecki's diary functions as a novel-within-a-novel,
  giving the reader crucial backstory about Wokulski's youth and the
  heroic ideals of a past generation, all filtered through the lens of
  his loving but often unreliable perspective.

- **A Man Out of Time:** Rzecki is a living relic of the Romantic era.
  He is a staunch Bonapartist, still waiting for a new Napoleon to
  liberate Poland, and he views the world through a haze of idealism and
  political nostalgia.<sup>9</sup> He is utterly out of step with the
  cynical, capitalist world that is emerging around him. His quiet,
  dignified adherence to his outdated ideals makes him one of the most
  poignant figures in the book.

- **Modern Reinterpretation: Queer Coding:** In one of the most striking
  examples of modern reinterpretation, a large contingent of
  contemporary fans reads Ignacy Rzecki as a **queer-coded
  character**.<sup>5</sup> His intense, lifelong, and selfless devotion
  to Wokulski; his status as a confirmed bachelor; and the deeply
  emotional, almost worshipful tone of his diary entries about his
  friend are interpreted as evidence of a profound, unrequited
  homosexual love. Whether intended by Prus or not, this reading has
  become a powerful and popular way for new generations to connect with
  Rzecki's character, reclaiming him as an icon of unspoken love and
  loyalty.

The novel's very structure embodies its central philosophical conflict.
The main narrative, which follows Wokulski's business ventures and
social climbing, is delivered by a detached, objective, third-person
narrator, reflecting the scientific, "sober-minded" worldview of
Positivism.<sup>15</sup> This is juxtaposed with Rzecki's diary, a
deeply personal, emotional, and backward-looking account steeped in the
ideals of Romanticism.<sup>1</sup> Prus does not privilege one mode over
the other; he places them side-by-side, forcing the reader to navigate
both. The "truth" of the novel emerges from the tension and dialogue
between these two forms. In this way, the book's structure

*is* its theme. It is not merely a story *about* the clash between
Romanticism and Positivism; it *is* that clash, enacted at the level of
narrative form. This complex, polyphonic construction was misunderstood
by many of Prus's contemporaries, who criticized its lack of cohesion
<sup>23</sup>, but it is precisely this quality that makes

*Lalka* feel so profoundly proto-modernist and intellectually resonant
today.

## Part IV: ***Lalka*** Goes Global: A Journey in Translation and Reception

For over half a century, *Lalka* remained largely a Polish secret, a
national masterpiece unknown to the wider world. Its journey to
international recognition has been a slow, fascinating process, driven
by dedicated translators, visionary publishers, and filmmakers who saw
its universal power. The novel's reception in different cultures reveals
as much about those cultures as it does about the book itself, showing
how a story's meaning can shift and expand as it crosses linguistic and
historical borders.

### 4.1 From Warsaw to the World: A Timeline of Discovery

*Lalka*'s path to global fame was not a sudden explosion but a slow
burn. For decades, it was handicapped by what one critic called the fate
of being "written in a minor language, by a writer from a defeated,
nationless people".<sup>15</sup> Polish literature, with a few
exceptions, simply wasn't on the radar of major Western
publishers.<sup>39</sup>

The first forays into other languages were tentative and often
incomplete. An Italian translation was "churned out and promptly
forgotten by a catholic press house" in the 1960s.<sup>40</sup> A French
edition appeared in three volumes in 1962 but was never
reprinted.<sup>40</sup> A German translation from 1954 also failed to
make a lasting impression on the market.<sup>40</sup> For the Anglophone
world, the wait was even longer.

The modern era of *Lalka*'s international reception truly began in 1972,
with the first English translation by David J. Welsh, a professor at the
University of Michigan.<sup>16</sup> However, the pivotal moment came in
1996, when Central European University Press released a revised version
of Welsh's translation, which was later picked up by the prestigious New
York Review Books (NYRB) Classics series in 2011.<sup>16</sup> This
edition, featuring a scholarly introduction by the eminent poet and
critic Stanisław Barańczak, finally positioned

*Lalka* not as an obscure regional classic, but as a major work of world
literature deserving of a place alongside the 19th-century
giants.<sup>42</sup>

The 21st century has seen a remarkable acceleration of this process. A
new Russian edition appeared in 2011.<sup>44</sup> A Chinese translation
was undertaken by a scholar fascinated with Prus's work.<sup>45</sup> In
2017, a Japanese translation by Emeritus Professor Tokimasa Sekiguchi
won the highly respected Yomiuri Prize for Literature, a major
achievement signaling deep scholarly appreciation far beyond the
European context.<sup>46</sup> Most significantly, the esteemed
German-language publisher Kampa Verlag is set to release a major new
translation in March 2025, a massive 1232-page volume accompanied by an
essay from Nobel laureate Olga Tokarczuk, explicitly marketing it as a
lost masterpiece on par with

*Anna Karenina*.<sup>47</sup> This marks the novel's definitive arrival
in the German literary scene.

### 4.2 Comparative Reception: How Different Cultures Read ***Lalka***

How a culture receives *Lalka* often depends on its own literary and
historical reference points.

- **The Anglophone World:** English-language critics almost invariably
  read Prus through the lens of his more famous 19th-century
  contemporaries. Reviews are filled with comparisons to Dickens (for
  the social panorama and memorable characters), Balzac (for the
  ambition and social climbing), Tolstoy (for the philosophical depth
  and epic scope), and Flaubert (for the psychological
  realism).<sup>5</sup> The focus tends to be on the universal themes of
  unrequited love, class struggle, and the conflict between idealism and
  reality. While the Polish historical context is acknowledged, it is
  often seen as a specific backdrop for these more universal dramas, its
  full weight sometimes lost on readers unfamiliar with the
  Partitions.<sup>27</sup>

- **Germany:** The upcoming 2025 German re-translation represents a
  conscious and deliberate effort to canonize the novel. The marketing
  explicitly places it in the "same league" as Tolstoy's *Anna Karenina*
  and Flaubert's *Madame Bovary*.<sup>50</sup> The publisher's
  description highlights the novel's "parable-like and psychologically
  sensitive" portrayal of a society in upheaval.<sup>51</sup> The
  inclusion of Olga Tokarczuk's essay lends contemporary intellectual
  weight and a seal of approval from a Polish Nobel laureate, signaling
  to German readers that this is a work of immense national and
  international importance.<sup>47</sup>

- **France:** French reception is uniquely intertwined with the 1968
  film adaptation by Wojciech Has. The film's recent restoration and
  theatrical re-release in 2022 was a significant cultural event, met
  with glowing reviews.<sup>52</sup> French critics immediately reached
  for their own literary parallels, describing the film as "Balzacian"
  in its depiction of social ambition and "Dostoevskian" in its
  exploration of obsessive love and psychological torment.<sup>53</sup>
  The novel's use of the French language itself is also a point of
  academic interest, as it was the lingua franca of the Polish
  aristocracy portrayed in the book, making its untranslatable nuances a
  subject of study.<sup>55</sup>

- **Russia:** Given that the novel is set under Tsarist Russian
  occupation and its protagonist makes his fortune supplying the Russian
  army during the Russo-Turkish War, the reception in Russia is
  inherently complex.<sup>9</sup> Russian readers approach the text with
  an innate understanding of the imperial-colonial dynamic that is often
  invisible to Westerners. Reviews from Russian readers on platforms
  like Chitai-gorod highlight the universal themes of love, morality,
  and social hypocrisy, with one reviewer comparing Wokulski's tragic
  story to that of Jack London's  
  *Martin Eden*—another self-made man destroyed by his love for a woman
  from a higher class.<sup>57</sup>

- **Japan:** The success of the Japanese translation is perhaps the most
  telling sign of the novel's universal appeal. Its winning of the
  prestigious Yomiuri Prize in 2017 demonstrates that the novel can be
  deeply appreciated in a cultural context far removed from 19th-century
  Europe.<sup>46</sup> This suggests that the core human dramas—of
  obsession, ambition, social alienation, and the clash between dreams
  and reality—resonate powerfully across vast cultural divides.

### Table: Chronology of Key International Translations

The following table tracks the key moments in *Lalka*'s journey into
other languages, illustrating its gradual ascent to global recognition.

| Language | Title in Translation | Year | Translator(s) | Publisher | Significance / Notes |
|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| **German** | *Die Puppe* | 1954 | *Information not available* | *Information not available* | Early translation that did not achieve wide circulation.<sup>40</sup> |
| **French** | *La Poupée* | 1962 | S. Deligne, W. Godlewski, M. Marcq | *Information not available* | Published in three volumes; never reprinted.<sup>40</sup> |
| **Italian** | *La Bambola* (Assumed) | c\. 1960s | *Information not available* | A Catholic press house | "Promptly forgotten" translation.<sup>40</sup> |
| **English** | *The Doll* | 1972 | David J. Welsh | Twayne Publishers, Inc. | First major English translation.<sup>16</sup> |
| **English** | *The Doll* | 1996 | David J. Welsh (revised by D. Tłoczyk & A. Zaranko) | Central European University Press / NYRB Classics (2011) | Pivotal revised edition with a critical introduction by Stanisław Barańczak that established the novel in the Anglophone literary world.<sup>16</sup> |
| **Russian** | *Кукла* (Kukla) | 2011 | *Information not available* | AST | Major modern Russian edition.<sup>44</sup> |
| **Chinese** | *傀儡* (Kuǐlěi) (Assumed) | *Date N/A* | Yi Lijun | *Information not available* | Translation by a notable scholar of Polish literature.<sup>45</sup> |
| **Japanese** | 人形 (Ningyō) | 2017 | Tokimasa Sekiguchi | Michitani | Won the prestigious Yomiuri Prize for Literature, a major critical success.<sup>46</sup> |
| **German** | *Die Puppe* | 2025 | Lisa Palmes, Lothar Quinkenstein | Kampa Verlag | Highly anticipated new translation, marketed as a major European classic, with an essay by Olga Tokarczuk.<sup>48</sup> |

The path of *Lalka* into the global canon has been unconventional. For
decades, Polish literature often struggled for recognition in the
English-speaking world, which has traditionally acted as a primary
gatekeeper for "world literature" status.<sup>39</sup>

*Lalka* did not follow this path. Its recent canonization is being
driven not by a top-down reassessment in Anglophone academia, but by a
decentralized, passionate network of cultural advocates. A high-profile
German publisher <sup>49</sup>, an arthouse French film distributor
<sup>53</sup>, and a prize-winning Japanese academic <sup>46</sup> have
become the key agents in its rediscovery. They are marketing the book
directly to new literary audiences, weaving it into the global canon
through a multi-nodal network. This suggests a potential new model for
how non-Anglophone classics can achieve international status in the 21st
century, bypassing the traditional centers of literary power.

## Part V: The Enduring Afterlife of ***Lalka***

A novel truly becomes a classic when it escapes the confines of its
pages and begins a new life in other media. *Lalka*'s story has been
retold and remixed for over half a century, from lavish film epics to
bite-sized TikTok memes. Each adaptation acts as a conversation with
Prus's original text, reflecting the values and technologies of its own
time and introducing the story to entirely new audiences.

### 5.1 From Page to Screen: The Iconic Adaptations

The visual world of *Lalka* has been most powerfully defined by two
iconic Polish screen adaptations, with a third major international
production on the horizon.

- **The 1968 Film by Wojciech Has:** This is no mere illustration of the
  book but a major work of cinematic art in its own right. Directed by
  the visionary Wojciech Has, this widescreen, colour epic is a lavish
  and ambitious production.<sup>59</sup> Has remained faithful to the
  novel's monumental scope and its sharp critique of a decadent
  aristocracy clashing with a rising merchant class.<sup>61</sup> The
  film is celebrated for its "richly theatrical" world, its focus on
  Prus's brilliant dialogue, and its "hypnotic gliding camera," a
  signature of the director.<sup>61</sup> Starring Mariusz Dmochowski as
  a brooding Wokulski and a stunningly beautiful Beata Tyszkiewicz as
  Izabela, the film captures the obsessive, dreamlike quality of the
  central romance.<sup>60</sup> A recent digital restoration has brought
  the film to a new international audience, sparking particular acclaim
  in France, where it was hailed as a rediscovered
  masterpiece.<sup>52</sup>

- **The 1977 TV Miniseries:** For generations of Poles, the definitive
  visual interpretation of *Lalka* is the nine-episode television series
  directed by Ryszard Ber.<sup>18</sup> Starring Jerzy Kamas as Wokulski
  and Małgorzata Braunek as Izabela, this beloved adaptation had the
  narrative space to delve deeper into the novel's many subplots and
  characters.<sup>1</sup> Its leisurely pace and detailed storytelling
  are often seen as being truer to the experience of reading the
  serialized novel, and for many who grew up with it, the faces of Kamas
  and Braunek are inextricably linked with the characters they
  portrayed.<sup>35</sup>

- **The Anticipated 2026 Film:** The world of *Lalka* is set for a major
  21st-century reimagining. A new feature film adaptation produced by
  Giant Films is scheduled to begin shooting in July 2025 for a 2026
  release.<sup>62</sup> The production signals high international
  ambitions, with a script from director Maciej Kawalski (  
  *Dangerous Gentlemen*) and cinematography by Piotr Sobociński Jr.
  (known for the Oscar-nominated *Corpus Christi*).<sup>63</sup> The
  casting has generated enormous excitement in Poland. The lead role of
  Wokulski will be played by Marcin Dorociński, an actor with a
  significant international profile from his roles in Netflix's  
  *The Queen's Gambit* and the *Mission: Impossible*
  franchise.<sup>63</sup> In a major coup, the legendary Polish actor
  Marek Kondrat is coming out of a 15-year retirement to play the
  pivotal role of Ignacy Rzecki, adding immense prestige and public
  interest to the project.<sup>62</sup> While a persistent rumor about a
  Netflix adaptation being filmed appears to be unfounded, this
  high-profile production promises to present  
  *Lalka* to a new global generation of film lovers.<sup>64</sup>

### 5.2 The 21st-Century Canon: ***Lalka*** in Memes, Fanfiction, and Digital Culture

The most recent and perhaps most surprising chapter in the novel's
afterlife is unfolding on the screens of smartphones. In the digital
realm, *Lalka* is not a dusty classic but a living text, actively being
remixed, debated, and reclaimed by a young, creative audience.

- **TikTok's *Lalka*-tok:** The novel has found a vibrant home on
  TikTok, particularly within the Polish BookTok community. This
  engagement takes several forms:

  - **Character Edits and Memes:** Users create short, punchy video
    edits (#lalkaedit) that function as visual essays on the characters,
    often pairing scenes from the film adaptations with modern,
    emotionally resonant music.<sup>3</sup> These edits distill complex
    relationships—like the tragic bond between Wokulski and Rzecki or
    the toxic dynamic with Izabela—into powerful, shareable clips. Memes
    also abound, humorously re-contextualizing plot points for a modern
    audience, such as jokes about Wokulski's "red hands" from his time
    in Siberia or his status as the ultimate "simp".<sup>3</sup>

  - **Relatability and Modern Psychology:** TikTok has become a space
    for intense emotional engagement with the text. Users post videos
    discussing how deeply they relate to the characters, diagnosing
    Wokulski with depression or lamenting their own experience with the
    "syndrom Wokulskiego" (Wokulski syndrome) of obsessive
    love.<sup>4</sup> This platform prioritizes personal, emotional
    reactions over formal academic analysis, demonstrating the novel's
    timeless psychological power.<sup>2</sup>

- **YouTube and Podcasts:** The digital engagement extends to
  longer-form content. The University of Warsaw has made academic
  lectures on *Lalka* by leading Prus scholars available on YouTube,
  bringing high-level analysis to a mass audience.<sup>65</sup> The
  platform also hosts numerous video essays that break down the complex
  plot for students, as well as full audiobook productions, making the
  dense text more accessible.<sup>66</sup>

- **Fanfiction and Creative Communities:** The intense fan engagement on
  visual platforms like TikTok points to a broader creative community.
  While large, centralized fanfiction archives for *Lalka* are not as
  prominent as for other fandoms, the full text of the novel has been
  uploaded to platforms like Wattpad, a major hub for fan-written
  stories.<sup>68</sup> This indicates that the foundational elements
  for a fanfiction community exist, providing a space where fans can
  rewrite endings, explore alternate pairings, and give characters like
  Izabela or Rzecki the agency or happiness they were denied in the
  original text.

### Table: Major Adaptations of ***Lalka***

This table provides a chronological overview of the most significant
adaptations of *Lalka*, showcasing its journey across different media
and eras.

| Year | Title | Medium | Director/Creator | Key Cast (Wokulski, Izabela, Rzecki) | Significance / Notes |
|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| **1968** | *Lalka* (The Doll) | Film | Wojciech Jerzy Has | Mariusz Dmochowski, Beata Tyszkiewicz, Tadeusz Fijewski | A lavish, internationally acclaimed cinematic epic. Recently restored and re-released, sparking new critical interest, especially in France.<sup>59</sup> |
| **1977** | *Lalka* (The Doll) | TV Miniseries | Ryszard Ber | Jerzy Kamas, Małgorzata Braunek, Bronisław Pawlik | The definitive adaptation for many Poles; its 9-episode format allowed for a detailed exploration of the novel's subplots.<sup>1</sup> |
| **2010s** | *Lalka* | Theatre | Various | Various | Numerous modern stage adaptations in Poland, often using contemporary techniques like live video and modern music (e.g., David Bowie karaoke) to reinterpret the classic text.<sup>18</sup> |
| **2026 (exp.)** | *Lalka* (The Doll) | Film | Maciej Kawalski | Marcin Dorociński, *TBA*, Marek Kondrat | A highly anticipated, large-scale international co-production poised to introduce the story to a new global audience.<sup>62</sup> |

## Part VI: The Polish Heart of the Matter

While *Lalka* has achieved global recognition, its meaning and resonance
in its homeland remain unique and unparalleled. For Polish readers, the
novel is not simply a great work of literature; it is a cultural
touchstone, a rite of passage, and a profound reflection of the national
soul. To understand *Lalka*'s international journey, one must first
understand its unshakable position at the very heart of Polish culture.

### 6.1 More Than a Book: ***Lalka*** as a National Treasure

In Poland, *Lalka* is revered as a national treasure, a status it has
earned by serving as a mirror to the Polish historical
experience.<sup>18</sup> Prus himself declared that his primary goal was
to "present our Polish idealists on a background of social
decay".<sup>28</sup> The novel perfectly captures the fundamental
tensions that have shaped Polish identity for centuries: the tragic
clash between Romantic idealism and hard-nosed pragmatism, the
collective trauma of failed uprisings, and the immense challenge of
forging a modern nation in the face of powerful, oppressive neighbors.

This status is reflected in official recognition. In 2012, the 100th
anniversary of Prus's death was declared the "Year of Bolesław Prus" by
UNESCO, cementing his and his novel's importance on a global cultural
stage.<sup>71</sup> The book is considered a cornerstone of Polish
literary heritage, with its surviving manuscript pages treated as
priceless national artifacts.<sup>20</sup>

Beyond official honors, *Lalka* is a living element in Polish cultural
discourse. It continues to inspire new works, most notably the
celebrated essay *"Lalka i perła"* (*The Doll and the Pearl*) by the
2018 Nobel Prize in Literature laureate, Olga Tokarczuk, who offered a
new, deeply personal, and mythological reading of the novel.<sup>1</sup>
The town of Nałęczów, where Prus often stayed, hosts a literary festival
named after the novel, featuring public readings and
discussions.<sup>73</sup> The book is a constant point of reference, a
shared text that Poles use to understand their past and debate their
present.

### 6.2 The Matura Rite of Passage: ***Lalka*** in the Polish School System

For nearly every Pole, the first encounter with *Lalka* is not one of
choice, but of obligation. The novel is a *lektura obowiązkowa*—a
mandatory part of the national literature curriculum in Polish high
schools.<sup>2</sup> This institutional role profoundly shapes its
reception.

The novel's place in the curriculum is cemented by its frequent
appearance on the *Matura*, the high-stakes national exit exam that
determines university admission. Essay questions on the *Matura* have
repeatedly focused on *Lalka*, asking students to analyze themes like
the nature of human destiny, the role of dreams, or to compare its
characters to those from other classic works.<sup>18</sup> This makes
mastering the novel's complexities a crucial task for generations of
Polish teenagers, leading to a unique, often fraught relationship with
the text.

This forced encounter during adolescence creates a distinct generational
pattern in the book's reception. Many students, overwhelmed by its
length and the formal, often dry, academic approach in the classroom,
initially come to dislike or resent the novel.<sup>5</sup> However, a
common experience for many Poles is to rediscover

*Lalka* years later as adults. Reading it on their own terms, free from
the pressure of exams, they discover a novel of immense psychological
depth, sharp humor, and timeless wisdom that they missed in their
youth.<sup>5</sup> This journey from required reading to beloved classic
is a rite of passage for many Polish readers.

### 6.3 A Concluding Analysis: Why ***Lalka*** Still Hits Different in Poland

While international readers may admire *Lalka* for its universal themes
of love and class, for Polish readers, it operates on a deeper,
allegorical level. It is not just a story; it is *their* story. The
characters' personal dilemmas are often read as allegories for the
nation's historical fate.

Wokulski's desperate struggle to gain acceptance from an arrogant,
decadent aristocracy mirrors Poland's own struggle for recognition and
respect on the European stage. Rzecki's poignant, nostalgic pining for a
glorious and heroic past reflects a deep-seated national tendency to
dwell on the glories of a bygone era. Izabela's beautiful but inert
form, her inability to adapt or to love, can be seen as a symbol of a
Poland trapped by its own history and social conventions, unable to move
forward.

The novel's famous open-endedness—the ambiguity surrounding Wokulski's
ultimate fate—is perhaps its most Polish quality. It perfectly mirrors
the unresolved questions of Polish history and identity. It offers no
easy answers, no simple closure. Instead, it presents a complex,
polyphonic world of conflicting ideas and irreconcilable desires. This
is why *Lalka* remains more than just a book in Poland. It is a piece of
collective memory, a shared vocabulary for discussing the national
condition, and a text that every new generation of Poles can, and must,
argue with anew.

## Part VII: Your Guide to Becoming a ***Lalka*** Expert

This report has explored the vast world of *Lalka*, but the journey
doesn't have to end here. For students, researchers, and curious readers
who want to dive even deeper, this section provides the tools to
continue your own investigation into Prus's masterpiece.

### 7.1 How to Spot Good Sources (A Student's Guide)

Navigating the world of literary research can be tough. Here’s a quick
guide to help you find reliable information for your school papers,
university essays, or just for winning an argument.

**🟢 Trust These Sources (The Gold Standard):**

- **University Websites and Repositories (.edu,.edu.pl,.ac.uk):**
  Academic institutions are your best friends. Look for papers and
  articles published by university presses or hosted on their official
  websites. For Polish sources, university repositories like
  repozytorium.umk.pl are excellent.

- **Peer-Reviewed Journals:** These are academic publications where
  articles are vetted by other experts in the field before being
  published. Databases like JSTOR, Project MUSE, and for Polish studies,
  **CEJSH** (The Central European Journal of Social Sciences and
  Humanities) and **BazHum**, are key resources.

- **Published Academic Books (with an ISBN):** Books from reputable
  university presses (e.g., Central European University Press, NYRB
  Classics) or established academic publishers are highly
  reliable.<sup>16</sup>

- **Major Cultural Institutions and Museums:** Official websites of
  national libraries (like Poland's **Biblioteka Narodowa** at
  polona.pl), museums (like the **Bolesław Prus Museum in Nałęczów**),
  and national cultural institutes (like Poland's **Culture.pl** and
  **Instytut Książki**) provide verified, high-quality
  information.<sup>1</sup>

- **The Polish Literary Bibliography (PBL):** The pbl.ibl.poznan.pl
  database is a comprehensive and authoritative source for academic
  research on Polish literature, listing scholarly articles, reviews,
  and books on *Lalka*.<sup>77</sup>

**🟡 Use With Caution (Check Their Work):**

- **Wikipedia:** A fantastic starting point for getting an overview, but
  never the final word. Always scroll to the bottom and check the
  sources listed in the "References" section. Use those primary sources,
  not the Wikipedia article itself, in your work.<sup>9</sup>

- **Reputable Blogs and Online Magazines:** A well-written blog post can
  offer great insights, but check the author's credentials. Are they a
  scholar, a known critic, or just a fan? Do they cite their
  sources?.<sup>35</sup>

- **YouTube Video Essays:** Many excellent video essays exist, but
  quality varies wildly. Check the creator's background and see if they
  list their sources in the video description.<sup>65</sup>

- **Polish Fan/Reader Sites (e.g., Lubimyczytać.pl):** These are the
  Polish equivalent of Goodreads and are invaluable for gauging reader
  reception and finding reviews, but treat the opinions as popular
  commentary, not scholarly analysis.<sup>78</sup>

**🔴 Avoid These (The Danger Zone):**

- **Student "Cheat Sheet" Sites (e.g., Bryki.pl, Sciaga.pl):** These
  Polish sites provide summaries and ready-made essays. They are often
  riddled with errors, oversimplifications, and are a major source of
  plagiarism. Avoid them completely.

- **Anonymous Posts or Sites Without Sources:** If you can't tell who
  wrote it or where they got their information, you can't trust it.

- **AI-Generated Content without Human Verification:** AI tools can
  provide summaries, but they can also "hallucinate" facts and sources.
  Always verify their claims with trusted human-vetted sources.

- **"Top 10" Lists with No Citations:** These are usually content
  marketing, not serious research.

**Pro Tip:** If a fact sounds too wild or too good to be true, apply the
"Rule of Three." Try to find at least two or three different,
independent, reliable sources that confirm it before you use it.

### 7.2 Quotes That Hit Different

Some lines from *Lalka* are so powerful they have become part of the
Polish cultural lexicon. Here are a few, in the original Polish and in
English translation, that capture the novel's essence.

- **On Moving On:***„Pluń na wszystko, co minęło: na własną boleść i na
  cudzą nikczemność... Wybierz sobie jakiś cel, jakikolwiek, i zacznij
  nowe życie.”* <sup>79</sup>  
    
  Translation: "Spit on everything that has passed: on your own
  suffering and on the vileness of others... Choose a goal for yourself,
  any goal, and start a new life." 79  
    
  Context: Words of advice offered to Wokulski, urging him to break free
  from his obsessive past.

- **On the Greatest Crime:***„Bywają wielkie zbrodnie na świecie, ale
  chyba największą jest zabić miłość.”* <sup>79</sup>  
    
  Translation: "Great crimes are always being committed in this world of
  ours, but surely the greatest is to murder love." 79  
    
  Context: Spoken by the wise old aristocrat, Prezesowa Zasławska,
  reflecting on her own lost love and warning Wokulski about the
  preciousness of true affection. This is one of the novel's most famous
  lines.

- **On Loneliness:***„Bo widzisz, najgorszą samotnością nie jest ta,
  która otacza człowieka, ale ta pustka w nim samym.”* <sup>79</sup>  
    
  Translation: "Because you see, the worst loneliness is not that which
  surrounds a man, but the emptiness inside him." 79  
    
  Context: A reflection on the deep, internal alienation that plagues
  the characters, regardless of their social standing.

- **On the Idealist's Blindness:***„Trzeba było poznawać kobiety nie
  przez okulary Mickiewiczów, Krasinskich albo Słowackich, ale ze
  statystyki, która uczy, że każdy biały anioł jest w dziesiątej części
  prostytutką.”* <sup>5</sup>  
    
  Translation: "One should get to know women not through the glasses of
  Mickiewicz, Krasiński, or Słowacki, but from statistics, which teach
  that every white angel is one-tenth a prostitute." 5  
    
  Context: A cynical and deeply misogynistic thought from Wokulski,
  blaming the idealized visions of women in Romantic poetry for his own
  disillusionment.

- **On Social Decay (The Author's Own Words):***„\[...\] pokazać naszych
  polskich idealistów na tle społecznego rozkładu. \[...\] Rozkład
  polega na tym, że ludzie dobrzy marnują się lub uciekają, a łotrom
  dzieje się dobrze.”* <sup>28</sup>  
    
  Translation: "\[I wanted to\] show our Polish idealists on a
  background of social decay. \[...\] The decay lies in that good people
  waste their lives or run off, and that scoundrels do well for
  themselves." 28  
    
  Context: Bolesław Prus explaining his own authorial intent for the
  novel, revealing its core critical purpose.

### 7.3 Missing Sources & Avenues for Future Research

Even a study as exhaustive as this has its limits, which themselves
point to exciting opportunities for future research.

**Topics Where Reliable Sources Were Limited:**

- **Reception in Non-European/Non-Anglophone Languages:** While we have
  good information on the German, French, Russian, and Japanese
  reception, detailed scholarly analysis of *Lalka*'s reception in other
  languages for which translations exist (e.g., Chinese, Spanish,
  Italian, Arabic, Hindi) is scarce in accessible sources.<sup>45</sup>

- **International Theatrical Adaptations:** While the Polish theatrical
  scene's engagement with *Lalka* is well-documented <sup>18</sup>,
  information on significant stage adaptations outside of Poland is
  difficult to find.

- **Fanfiction and Digital Communities:** The existence of a vibrant fan
  culture on TikTok is clear <sup>3</sup>, but quantitative data and
  qualitative analysis of dedicated fanfiction archives (like Archive of
  Our Own) or Discord servers are not readily available in the
  researched materials.

**Claims Requiring Further Verification:**

- **The Netflix Adaptation Rumor:** A single source mentions a Netflix
  adaptation being filmed in Warsaw in July 2025.<sup>64</sup> This is
  highly likely a misidentification of the upcoming Giant Films
  production <sup>62</sup> and requires official confirmation from
  Netflix to be considered credible.

**Promising Avenues for Future Research:**

- **Comparative Translation Analysis:** A detailed scholarly comparison
  of the 1972 David Welsh translation and the 1996/2011 revised NYRB
  Classics edition would be invaluable for understanding how the
  English-language perception of the novel has evolved. A similar study
  of the old (1954) and new (2025) German translations could reveal
  shifts in German literary reception.

- **Digital Ethnography of *Lalka*-tok:** A dedicated academic study of
  the *Lalka* fandom on TikTok, analyzing popular trends, meme formats,
  and the language users employ to discuss the novel, would be a
  fascinating contribution to the fields of digital humanities and
  reception studies.

- **The 2026 Film's Reception:** The upcoming international film
  adaptation presents a perfect opportunity for a major reception study.
  Analyzing its critical reviews, box office performance, and audience
  discussions across different countries will provide a rich case study
  in how a national classic is translated for a 21st-century global
  cinema audience.

### **Bibliography**

#### A. Primary Sources

- Prus, Bolesław. *Lalka*. First book edition, Gebethner i Wolff, 1890.
  <sup>9</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Prus, Bolesław. *Lalka*. Serialized in *Kurier Codzienny*, 1887-1889.
  <sup>1</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Prus, Bolesław (Aleksander Głowacki). "O odkryciach i wynalazkach"
  ("On Discoveries and Inventions"). Public Lecture, 1873. <sup>12</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Prus, Bolesław. Manuscript of *Lalka* (one-third). Housed at the
  Warsaw Public Library, Warsaw, Poland. <sup>20</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Prus, Bolesław. *The Doll*. Translated by David Welsh, revised by
  Dariusz Tołczyk and Anna Zaranko, New York Review Books, 2011.
  <sup>37</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Prus, Bolesław. *La Poupée*. Translated by Simone Deligne, Wenceslas
  Godlewski, and Michel Marcq, 1962. <sup>41</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Prus, Bolesław. *Die Puppe*. Translated by Lisa Palmes and Lothar
  Quinkenstein, Kampa Verlag, 2025. <sup>49</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### B. Secondary Sources (Organized by Language)

##### **Polish Sources**

- Bachórz, Józef, editor. *Lalka t I-II*. Zakład Narodowy im.
  Ossolińskich (Biblioteka Narodowa series), 1998.<sup>76</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Culture.pl. "Bolesław Prus, 'Lalka'". *Culture.pl*, Polish,
  Accessed 2025. <sup>1</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Forajter, Wacław. "Odczytać Prusa na nowo." Lalka Literary Festival,
  Nałęczów, 2021. <sup>73</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- KLP.pl. "Lalka - Opracowanie." *KLP.pl*, Polish, Accessed 2025.
  <sup>18</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Kowalski, Robert. "Bolesław Prus, 'Lalka'". *Culture.pl*, 29
  Sept. 2021. <sup>1</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Polska Bibliografia Literacka (PBL). "Prus Bolesław: \[Lalka\] The
  doll." *IBL PAN*, Accessed 2025. <sup>77</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Poezja.org. "Wydarzenia historyczne w Lalce." *Poezja.org*, Polish,
  Accessed 2025. <sup>29</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Radio PIK. "Bolesław Prus - 'Lalka'". *Radio PIK*, Polish,
  Accessed 2025. <sup>19</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Tezeusz.pl. "Prus Bolesław - Lalka t. I-II." *Tezeusz.pl*, Polish,
  Accessed 2025. <sup>17</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Tomczok, Paweł. "Ekonomia w 'Lalce' Bolesława Prusa." *Napis. Pismo
  poświęcone literaturze okolicznościowej i użytkowej*, vol. 21, 2015,
  pp. 198-221.<sup>82</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Zintegrowana Platforma Edukacyjna (ZPE). "Lalka Bolesława Prusa –
  jeszcze powieść czy już epopeja?" *ZPE.gov.pl*, Polish Ministry of
  Education, Accessed 2025. <sup>74</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

##### **English Sources**

- Buda, Agata. "Foreign travels in 'The Doll' by Bolesław Prus as a
  comment on the condition of 19th-century Poland." *World Literature
  Studies*, vol. 11, no. 2, 2019, pp. 123-131.<sup>83</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Caron, David. "The Polish 'Novel without a Hero' and the Russian
  Realist Novel." *The Toronto Slavic Quarterly*, no. 16, Spring
  2006.<sup>84</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Culture.pl. "Aesopian: The Secret Code to Unlocking Polish
  Literature." *Culture.pl*, English, Accessed 2025. <sup>34</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Culture.pl. "The Boleslaw Prus Museum in Naleczow." *Culture.pl*,
  English, Accessed 2025. <sup>75</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Culture.pl. "What is Polish Theatre Like? Sketches from an American
  Scenic Designer." *Culture.pl*, English, Accessed 2025. <sup>69</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Jauksz, Monika. "Shadows of Everyday Life. – The Poetics of the
  Description in The Doll in the Light of Notes on the Composition of
  Bolesław Prus." *Forum of Poetics*, no. 19, Winter 2020, pp.
  117-135.<sup>26</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Kasparek, Christopher. "Prus, Bolesław." *The New World Encyclopedia*,
  Accessed 2025. <sup>10</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Miłosz, Czesław. *The History of Polish Literature*. University of
  California Press, 1983. (Referenced in <sup>9</sup>) ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Orthofer, M.A. "The Doll by Bolesław Prus." *The Complete Review*, 18
  Jan. 2016. <sup>36</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Skinazi, Karen E. H. "The Parvenu and the Jew—Objects of Scorn in
  Bolesław Prus's Classic Polish Novel 'The Doll'." *Jewish Journal*, 24
  Sept. 2021. <sup>38</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Sul Romanzo. "Back catalogue \#3 Bolesław Prus, Lalka / The Doll
  (1890). A forgotten masterpiece of the European novel."
  *Sulromanzo.it*, 19 Aug. 2013. <sup>40</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Szweykowski, Zygmunt. *Twórczość Bolesława Prusa* (The Art of Bolesław
  Prus). Państwowy Instytut Wydawniczy, 1972. (Referenced in
  <sup>9</sup>) ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Wilmes, Justin. "Dramatizing Dualism: The Use of the Literary Double
  in Boleslaw Prus's The Doll." *The Polish Review*, vol. 62, no. 4,
  2017, pp. 47-66.<sup>23</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Zembaty, Wojciech. "The Doll by Bolesław Prus." *Culture.pl*, 29
  June 2020. <sup>15</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Zielony Balonik Book Club. "The Doll by Bolesław Prus."
  *zielonybalonik-bookclub.org.uk*, Accessed 2025. <sup>16</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

##### **German Sources**

- Deutschlandfunk Kultur. "Bolesław Prus: Die Puppe." *Lesart*, 31
  Mar. 2025. <sup>48</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Kampa Verlag. "Die Puppe." *kampaverlag.ch*, Accessed 2025.
  <sup>49</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- LovelyBooks. "Die Puppe von Bolesław Prus." *lovelybooks.de*,
  Accessed 2025. <sup>51</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

##### **French Sources**

- Avoir-Alire.com. "La poupée - Wojciech J. Has - critique."
  *avoir-alire.com*, 9 Nov. 2022. <sup>54</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Blog Versus. "« La poupée » de Wojciech Has : Elle fait non, non,
  non." *blog.revueversus.com*, 9 Dec. 2022. <sup>53</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Cinémaniac. "La Poupée (1968)." *cinemaniac.fr*, Accessed 2025.
  <sup>85</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- CineDweller. "La poupée : la critique du film de Wojciech Has."
  *cinedweller.com*, 7 Dec. 2022. <sup>86</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

##### **Russian Sources**

- Chitai-gorod.ru. "Кукла - Болеслав Прус: отзывы." *chitai-gorod.ru*,
  Accessed 2025. <sup>57</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

#### C. Multimedia and Digital Sources

- @diamentowe_strony. "Odkryj, jak ulubiona lektura Bolesława Prusa
  wpływa na mój świat." TikTok, 2024. <sup>4</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- @nietoperzezakolnierze. "Lalka- hot or not?" TikTok, 3 Mar. 2024.
  <sup>2</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- @wokulski_prus. TikTok Channel. Accessed 2025. <sup>3</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- @wujek.sebek. "Lalka i jej autor Bolesław Prus w Nałęczowie." TikTok,
  20 Oct. 2024. <sup>87</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- Agencja Muzyczna Polskiego Radia. "Bolesław Prus - Lalka (Audiobook)."
  YouTube, 2015. <sup>67</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Goodreads. User reviews for *Lalka*. *goodreads.com*, Accessed 2025.
  <sup>5</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

- Harvard Film Archive. "The Doll (Lalka)." *harvardfilmarchive.org*,
  April 2015. <sup>61</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Instytut Literatury Polskiej UW. "Dlaczego 'Lalka' Bolesława Prusa nie
  jest powieścią tylko o miłości?" YouTube, 2020. <sup>65</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Sekiguchi, Tokimasa. "Yomiuri Prize for Literature." *Tokyo University
  of Foreign Studies News*, 1 Feb. 2017. <sup>46</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- TVP World. "Polish legend returns to star in a new adaptation of cult
  novel." *tvpworld.com*, 2025. <sup>63</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Wiedza z wami. "Dlaczego 'Lalka' Bolesława Prusa nie jest powieścią
  tylko o miłości? Omówienie lektury." YouTube, 2020. <sup>66</sup>
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Cytowane prace

1.  Bolesław Prus, "Lalka" \| \#literatura - Culture.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/pl/dzielo/boleslaw-prus-lalka</u>](https://culture.pl/pl/dzielo/boleslaw-prus-lalka)

2.  Is Lalka by Boleslaw Prus a Hot Topic in Booktok? - TikTok,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@nietoperzezakolnierze/video/7341904867767733536</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@nietoperzezakolnierze/video/7341904867767733536)

3.  Wokulski Prus Literatura (@wokulski_prus) \| TikTok, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@wokulski_prus</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@wokulski_prus)

4.  Bolesław Prus: Książka, która zmienia życie \| TikTok, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@diamentowe_strony/video/7488360642051624214</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@diamentowe_strony/video/7488360642051624214)

5.  Lalka by Bolesław Prus \| Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/484466.Lalka</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/484466.Lalka)

6.  Lalka by Bolesław Prus \| Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/17619790</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/17619790)

7.  www.goodreads.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/17619790#:~:text=Warsaw%20under%20Russian%20rule%20in,a%20frigid%20society%20doll%2C%20Izabela.</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/17619790#:~:text=Warsaw%20under%20Russian%20rule%20in,a%20frigid%20society%20doll%2C%20Izabela.)

8.  Novels one must read to understand human condition: The Doll by
    Boleslaw Prus \| Ideas, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://mirekkruk.wordpress.com/2015/11/13/novels-one-must-read-to-understand-human-condition-the-doll-by-boleslaw-prus/</u>](https://mirekkruk.wordpress.com/2015/11/13/novels-one-must-read-to-understand-human-condition-the-doll-by-boleslaw-prus/)

9.  The Doll (Prus novel) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Doll\_(Prus_novel)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Doll_(Prus_novel))

10. Boleslaw Prus - New World Encyclopedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Boleslaw_Prus</u>](https://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Boleslaw_Prus)

11. Bolesław Prus - New York Review Books, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.nyrb.com/collections/boleslaw-prus</u>](https://www.nyrb.com/collections/boleslaw-prus)

12. Bolesław Prus - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boles%C5%82aw_Prus</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boles%C5%82aw_Prus)

13. Bolesław Prus (Aleksander Głowacki) - Biography \| Artist -
    Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/artist/boleslaw-prus-aleksander-glowacki</u>](https://culture.pl/en/artist/boleslaw-prus-aleksander-glowacki)

14. Bolesław Prus Facts for Kids, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://kids.kiddle.co/Boles%C5%82aw_Prus</u>](https://kids.kiddle.co/Boles%C5%82aw_Prus)

15. The Doll – Bolesław Prus \| \#language & literature - Culture.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/work/the-doll-boleslaw-prus</u>](https://culture.pl/en/work/the-doll-boleslaw-prus)

16. The Doll - Zielony Balonik - The Scottish Polish Book Club,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.zielonybalonik-bookclub.org.uk/books/the-doll/</u>](https://www.zielonybalonik-bookclub.org.uk/books/the-doll/)

17. Lalka T. I-II, Biblioteka Narodowa - Bolesław Prus - Tezeusz.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://tezeusz.pl/prus-boleslaw-lalka-t-i-ii-biblioteka-narodowa-boleslaw-prus</u>](https://tezeusz.pl/prus-boleslaw-lalka-t-i-ii-biblioteka-narodowa-boleslaw-prus)

18. Lalka - wszystko, co powinieneś wiedzieć o książce Bolesława ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://klp.pl/lalka/</u>](https://klp.pl/lalka/)

19. Bolesław Prus - „Lalka” - Polskie Radio PiK, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.radiopik.pl/248,7,boleslaw-prus-lalka</u>](https://www.radiopik.pl/248,7,boleslaw-prus-lalka)

20. Lalka (powieść) – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lalka\_(powie%C5%9B%C4%87)</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lalka_(powie%C5%9B%C4%87))

21. The Doll by Bolesław Prus \| Open Library, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://openlibrary.org/works/OL2852373W/Lalka</u>](https://openlibrary.org/works/OL2852373W/Lalka)

22. Lalka - Boleslaw Prus - Google Books, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://books.google.com/books/about/Lalka.html?id=ZLP1rQEACAAJ</u>](https://books.google.com/books/about/Lalka.html?id=ZLP1rQEACAAJ)

23. (PDF) Dramatizing Dualism: The Use of the Literary Double in
    Bolesław Prus's The Doll, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/321231842_Dramatizing_Dualism_The_Use_of_the_Literary_Double_in_Boleslaw_Prus's_The_Doll</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/321231842_Dramatizing_Dualism_The_Use_of_the_Literary_Double_in_Boleslaw_Prus's_The_Doll)

24. Lalka Bolesław Prus książka \| TaniaKsiazka.pl, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/lalka-boleslaw-prus</u>](https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/lalka-boleslaw-prus)

25. Bolesław Prus (Author of Lalka) - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/297006.Boles_aw_Prus</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/297006.Boles_aw_Prus)

26. Shadows of Everyday Life. - The Poetics of the Description in The
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://fp.amu.edu.pl/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/MJauksz_ShadowsOfEverydayLife_ForumOfPoetics_19_2020.pdf</u>](http://fp.amu.edu.pl/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/MJauksz_ShadowsOfEverydayLife_ForumOfPoetics_19_2020.pdf)

27. Lalka - Magnificent Octopus, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://magnificentoctopus.blogspot.com/2012/02/lalka.html</u>](http://magnificentoctopus.blogspot.com/2012/02/lalka.html)

28. What are some good books in Polish? - Quora, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-good-books-in-Polish</u>](https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-good-books-in-Polish)

29. Wydarzenia historyczne w Lalce – Bolesław Prus - poezja.org,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://poezja.org/wz/interpretacja/5674/Wydarzenia_historyczne_w_Lalce</u>](https://poezja.org/wz/interpretacja/5674/Wydarzenia_historyczne_w_Lalce)

30. Introduction to “the Doll” by Bolesław Prus with Julia Wilde -
    YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=64y0jWmP9zY</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=64y0jWmP9zY)

31. Kontrast między światem biednym a bogatym w Lalka Bolesława Prusa \|
    TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@oliwiia_rydz/video/7361823878601035040</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@oliwiia_rydz/video/7361823878601035040)

32. Tracing the traces of "The Doll" by Bolesław Prus - a guided walk -
    BestOfWarsaw \| Guide to Warsaw, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bestofwarsaw.pl/en/events/sladami-lalki-boleslawa-prusa-spacer-z-przewodnikiem-5/</u>](https://bestofwarsaw.pl/en/events/sladami-lalki-boleslawa-prusa-spacer-z-przewodnikiem-5/)

33. "LALKA" Bolesława Prusa w Warszawie 2020 \| MOBILNI W KULTURZE -
    YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hp8xTzbAmO8</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hp8xTzbAmO8)

34. Aesopian: The Secret Code to Unlocking Polish Literature \| Article
    \| Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/article/aesopian-the-secret-code-to-unlocking-polish-literature</u>](https://culture.pl/en/article/aesopian-the-secret-code-to-unlocking-polish-literature)

35. Bolesław Prus' “Lalka” (“The Doll”) – a romance novel for cynical
    men. \| Amazing Worlds, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://amazingworlds.home.blog/2019/05/27/boleslaw-prus-lalka-the-doll-a-romance-novel-for-cynical-men/</u>](https://amazingworlds.home.blog/2019/05/27/boleslaw-prus-lalka-the-doll-a-romance-novel-for-cynical-men/)

36. The Doll - Bolesław Prus - Complete Review, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.complete-review.com/reviews/polska/prusb.htm</u>](https://www.complete-review.com/reviews/polska/prusb.htm)

37. Marking Territory: A Flâneur's Failure in I. L. Peretz's Mayses,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.quest-cdecjournal.it/marking-territory-a-flaneurs-failure-in-i-l-peretzs-mayses/</u>](https://www.quest-cdecjournal.it/marking-territory-a-flaneurs-failure-in-i-l-peretzs-mayses/)

38. The Parvenu and the Jew—Objects of Scorn in Bolesław Prus's Classic
    Polish Novel, “The Doll” - Jewish Journal, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://jewishjournal.com/culture/arts/books/340859/the-parvenu-and-the-jew-objects-of-scorn-in-boleslaw-pruss-classic-polish-novel-the-doll/</u>](https://jewishjournal.com/culture/arts/books/340859/the-parvenu-and-the-jew-objects-of-scorn-in-boleslaw-pruss-classic-polish-novel-the-doll/)

39. Modernist Trends in Twentieth-Century Polish Fiction - UCL
    Discovery, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/10078283/1/SSEES0013.pdf</u>](https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/10078283/1/SSEES0013.pdf)

40. Back catalogue \#3 Bolesław Prus, Lalka / The Doll (1890). A
    forgotten masterpiece of the European novel - Sul Romanzo,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sulromanzo.it/blog/back-catalogue-3-boleslaw-prus-lalka-the-doll-1890-a-forgotten-masterpiece-of-the-european-nove</u>](https://www.sulromanzo.it/blog/back-catalogue-3-boleslaw-prus-lalka-the-doll-1890-a-forgotten-masterpiece-of-the-european-nove)

41. La Poupée (Lalka); roman - UNESCO Digital Library, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000132116</u>](https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000132116)

42. 11 Great Polish Books You Have to Read \| Article \| Culture.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/article/11-great-polish-books-you-have-to-read</u>](https://culture.pl/en/article/11-great-polish-books-you-have-to-read)

43. Lalka. - Reading Length, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.readinglength.com/book/BQ62yKv</u>](https://www.readinglength.com/book/BQ62yKv)

44. Editions of Lalka by Bolesław Prus - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/work/editions/2618875-lalka?page=2</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/work/editions/2618875-lalka?page=2)

45. A Study on the Translation of Terms in Chinese Online Xianxia
    Novels - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/367619542_A_Study_on_the_Translation_of_Terms_in_Chinese_Online_Xianxia_Novels</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/367619542_A_Study_on_the_Translation_of_Terms_in_Chinese_Online_Xianxia_Novels)

46. TUFS Emeritus Professor Wins Yomiuri Prize \| FY 2017 \| TOPICS \|
    Tokyo University of Foreign Studies, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tufs.ac.jp/english/NEWS/2017/post_1186.html</u>](https://www.tufs.ac.jp/english/NEWS/2017/post_1186.html)

47. Die Puppe by Bolesław Prus - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/123081897-die-puppe</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/123081897-die-puppe)

48. Liebe im Zeitalter der Dampfmaschine - Deutschlandfunk, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bilder.deutschlandfunk.de/9b/ea/37/14/9bea3714-2854-4ae7-93bc-0ce77b11d4dd/boleslaw-prus-die-puppe-100.pdf</u>](https://bilder.deutschlandfunk.de/9b/ea/37/14/9bea3714-2854-4ae7-93bc-0ce77b11d4dd/boleslaw-prus-die-puppe-100.pdf)

49. Die Puppe - Kampa Verlag, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://kampaverlag.ch/produkt/die-puppe/</u>](https://kampaverlag.ch/produkt/die-puppe/)

50. Die Puppe von Boleslaw Prus (gebundenes Buch) - andere Buchhandlung,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://anderebuchhandlung.de/shop/item/9783311100485/die-puppe-von-boleslaw-prus-gebundenes-buch</u>](https://anderebuchhandlung.de/shop/item/9783311100485/die-puppe-von-boleslaw-prus-gebundenes-buch)

51. Die Puppe - von Bolesław Prus 5,0 - LovelyBooks, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.lovelybooks.de/autor/Boles%C5%82aw-Prus/Die-Puppe-7229666228-w/</u>](https://www.lovelybooks.de/autor/Boles%C5%82aw-Prus/Die-Puppe-7229666228-w/)

52. La Poupée (1968) de Wojciech Has - L'Oeil sur l'écran, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://films.oeil-ecran.com/2023/06/15/la-poupee-1968-de-wojciech-has/</u>](https://films.oeil-ecran.com/2023/06/15/la-poupee-1968-de-wojciech-has/)

53. « La poupée de Wojciech Has : Elle fait non, non, non \| «Le blog de
    la revue de cinéma Versus, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blog.revueversus.com/2022/12/09/la-poupee-de-wojciech-has-elle-fait-non-non-non/</u>](https://blog.revueversus.com/2022/12/09/la-poupee-de-wojciech-has-elle-fait-non-non-non/)

54. La poupée - Wojciech J. Has - critique - aVoir-aLire.com, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.avoir-alire.com/la-poupee-wojciech-j-has-critique</u>](https://www.avoir-alire.com/la-poupee-wojciech-j-has-critique)

55. Unbecoming Language: Anti-Identitarian French Feminist Fictions -
    ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330297923_Unbecoming_Language_Anti-Identitarian_French_Feminist_Fictions</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330297923_Unbecoming_Language_Anti-Identitarian_French_Feminist_Fictions)

56. The French language in "Lalka" by Bolesław Prus \| Request PDF -
    ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298456387_The_French_language_in_Lalka_by_Boleslaw_Prus</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298456387_The_French_language_in_Lalka_by_Boleslaw_Prus)

57. Кукла (Болеслав Прус) купить книгу по выгодной цене в «Читай-город»
    (978-5-04-181150-1), otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.chitai-gorod.ru/product/kukla-2968041</u>](https://www.chitai-gorod.ru/product/kukla-2968041)

58. Prus, Boleslaw: Die Puppe - Bültmann & Gerriets, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bueltmann-gerriets.de/9783311100485</u>](https://bueltmann-gerriets.de/9783311100485)

59. Buy cinema tickets for The Doll \| BFI Southbank, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=doll</u>](https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=doll)

60. The Doll (Lalka) 1968 with English subtitles - Eastern European
    Movies, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://easterneuropeanmovies.com/melodrama/the-doll</u>](https://easterneuropeanmovies.com/melodrama/the-doll)

61. The Doll - Harvard Film Archive, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://harvardfilmarchive.org/calendar/the-doll-2015-04</u>](https://harvardfilmarchive.org/calendar/the-doll-2015-04)

62. New film adaptation of Polish literary classic 'The Doll' in the
    works - Polskie Radio, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.polskieradio.pl/395/7791/Artykul/3539508,new-film-adaptation-of-polish-literary-classic-the-doll-in-the-works</u>](https://www.polskieradio.pl/395/7791/Artykul/3539508,new-film-adaptation-of-polish-literary-classic-the-doll-in-the-works)

63. Polish legend returns to star in a new adaptation of cult novel -
    TVP World, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://tvpworld.com/87409513/polish-legend-returns-to-star-in-a-new-adaptation-of-cult-novel</u>](https://tvpworld.com/87409513/polish-legend-returns-to-star-in-a-new-adaptation-of-cult-novel)

64. City boleslaw prus hi-res stock photography and images - Alamy,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.alamy.com/stock-photo/city-boleslaw-prus.html</u>](https://www.alamy.com/stock-photo/city-boleslaw-prus.html)

65. Kurs literatury polskiej XIX wieku. "Lalka" Bolesława Prusa -
    YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7It7f5Y_3hE</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7It7f5Y_3hE)

66. Lalka - Bolesław Prus. Co trzeba wiedzieć? Fragmenty lekcji na
    żywo. - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FjArYsIG1HI</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FjArYsIG1HI)

67. Bolesław Prus - Lalka \#68/105 (Audiobook) - YouTube, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OuaGGQioIjs</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OuaGGQioIjs)

68. Lalka \| B. Prus - e-Lektury - Wattpad, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.wattpad.com/story/361310604-lalka-%F0%9D%90%81-%F0%9D%90%8F%F0%9D%90%AB%F0%9D%90%AE%F0%9D%90%AC</u>](https://www.wattpad.com/story/361310604-lalka-%F0%9D%90%81-%F0%9D%90%8F%F0%9D%90%AB%F0%9D%90%AE%F0%9D%90%AC)

69. 'What Is Polish Theatre Like?' Sketches by an American Scenic
    Designer \| Article - Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/article/what-is-polish-theatre-like-sketches--american-scenic-designer</u>](https://culture.pl/en/article/what-is-polish-theatre-like-sketches--american-scenic-designer)

70. Discover 8 Classics from Poland's Required Reading Curriculum \|
    Article - Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/article/discover-8-classics-from-polands-required-reading-curriculum</u>](https://culture.pl/en/article/discover-8-classics-from-polands-required-reading-curriculum)

71. Rusza Rok Bolesława Prusa \| Wydarzenie - Culture.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/pl/wydarzenie/rusza-rok-boleslawa-prusa</u>](https://culture.pl/pl/wydarzenie/rusza-rok-boleslawa-prusa)

72. Bolesław Prus : ,,Lalka'' : (komentarz) : geneza utworu,
    charakterystyka głównych postaci oraz dokładna treść - Pomeranian
    Digital Library, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pbc.gda.pl/dlibra/publication/31707/edition/26439?language=en</u>](https://pbc.gda.pl/dlibra/publication/31707/edition/26439?language=en)

73. LALKA Festiwal Literacki w Nałęczowie \| Nałęczów - oficjalny
    portal, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://naleczow.pl/event/lalka-festiwal-literacki-w-naleczowie/</u>](https://naleczow.pl/event/lalka-festiwal-literacki-w-naleczowie/)

74. lalka - Katalog materiałów - zpe.gov.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://zpe.gov.pl/szukaj?query=lalka</u>](https://zpe.gov.pl/szukaj?query=lalka)

75. The Boleslaw Prus Museum in Naleczow \| Venue - Culture.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/place/the-boleslaw-prus-museum-in-naleczow</u>](https://culture.pl/en/place/the-boleslaw-prus-museum-in-naleczow)

76. Lalka t I-II Prus Bolesław \[Biblioteka Narodowa / 1998\] -
    Antykwariat Warszawa, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://antykwariatwaw.pl/pl/p/Lalka-t-I-II-Prus-Boleslaw-Biblioteka-Narodowa-1998/153529</u>](https://antykwariatwaw.pl/pl/p/Lalka-t-I-II-Prus-Boleslaw-Biblioteka-Narodowa-1998/153529)

77. dostęp on-line do pbl - Polska Bibliografia Literacka, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pbl.ibl.poznan.pl/dostep/index.php?s=d_biezacy&f=zapisy&p_tworcaid=3426</u>](https://pbl.ibl.poznan.pl/dostep/index.php?s=d_biezacy&f=zapisy&p_tworcaid=3426)

78. Lalka - Bolesław Prus \| Książka w Lubimyczytac.pl - Opinie, oceny,
    ceny, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5165406/lalka</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5165406/lalka)

79. Lalka Quotes by Bolesław Prus - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/2618875-lalka</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/2618875-lalka)

80. Quotes by Bolesław Prus (Author of Lalka) - Goodreads, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/297006.Boles_aw_Prus</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/297006.Boles_aw_Prus)

81. Read Bilingual Book The Doll (Lalka) in Polish with translation -
    AnyLang, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://anylang.net/en/books/pl/doll</u>](https://anylang.net/en/books/pl/doll)

82. Dyskurs monetarny w "Lalce" Bolesława Prusa - Napis. Pismo
    poświęcone literaturze okolicznościowej i użytkowej - Issue 21 -
    cejsh, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://cejsh.icm.edu.pl/cejsh/element/bwmeta1.element.desklight-aa216518-8546-475a-8742-9a45c77bfd87</u>](http://cejsh.icm.edu.pl/cejsh/element/bwmeta1.element.desklight-aa216518-8546-475a-8742-9a45c77bfd87)

83. Foreign travels in “The Doll” by Bolesław Prus as a comment on the
    condition of 19th-century Poland - SAV, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sav.sk/journals/uploads/07261252WLS2_2019_Buda.pdf</u>](https://www.sav.sk/journals/uploads/07261252WLS2_2019_Buda.pdf)

84. Toronto Slavic Quarterly: The Road to Self: Reading Prus',
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://sites.utoronto.ca/tsq/16/caron16.shtml</u>](http://sites.utoronto.ca/tsq/16/caron16.shtml)

85. La Poupée : Trop belle pour lui - Cinemaniac.fr, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cinemaniac.fr/la-poupee/</u>](https://www.cinemaniac.fr/la-poupee/)

86. La poupée : la critique du film de Wojciech Has (2022) -
    CinéDweller, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://cinedweller.com/movie/la-poupee-la-critique-du-film/</u>](https://cinedweller.com/movie/la-poupee-la-critique-du-film/)

87. Lalka i jej autor Bolesław Prus w Nałęczowie - TikTok, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@wujek.sebek/video/7427792139607608609</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@wujek.sebek/video/7427792139607608609)
