# The Great Gatsby: An International Autopsy of the American Dream

## Part I: The Birth of a Legend

### Section 1: Why Should You Care About a 100-Year-Old Book?

**Introduction: More Than Just Parties and Sad Rich People**

At first glance, *The Great Gatsby* might seem like a relic from a
distant past—a story about glamorous parties, flapper dresses, and
impossibly wealthy people nursing broken hearts in Long Island mansions.
It’s easy to dismiss it as a historical snapshot of the "Roaring
Twenties," an era of jazz and illegal gin that feels a world away from
the 21st century. But to do so would be to miss the point entirely.
Beneath the shimmering surface of F. Scott Fitzgerald’s masterpiece lies
a raw, timeless, and startlingly modern story about the desperate, often
tragic, human need to invent ourselves.

Jay Gatsby, the enigmatic millionaire who gives the book its name, is
the ultimate architect of his own identity. He constructs a new name, a
new past, and a dazzling new reality, all in the service of a single,
obsessive dream. In an age of curated Instagram feeds, personal
branding, and the constant pressure to project an image of success,
Gatsby’s struggle is not just relatable; it’s our own, amplified and
reflected back at us through the lens of the Jazz Age. The novel asks
questions that are more relevant now than ever: What is the difference
between the person you are and the person you pretend to be? What is the
cost of chasing an idealized past? And what happens when the dream
you’ve built your entire life around turns out to be an illusion?

This report will dissect *The Great Gatsby* from a global perspective,
exploring how this quintessentially American story has been read,
translated, and reimagined around the world. It will journey from the
Long Island parties that inspired the book to the Polish theaters that
have used it as a mirror for their own country's transformation. It will
uncover the messy, personal story of its creation, its shocking initial
failure, and its unlikely resurrection to become one of the most
celebrated novels ever written. This is not just a study of a book; it
is an exploration of the universal dream of a better life and the
beautiful, brutal ways it can fall apart.

**"Skip to This Part If..." Navigation Guide**

- **...You're obsessed with the Roaring Twenties aesthetic.** -\> Jump
  to Section 4: The World of Gatsby & Section 10: Why Gatsby Still
  Matters.

- **...You're here for the tragic love story.** -\> Jump to Section 5:
  Reading Between the Lines & Section 10: Why Gatsby Still Matters.

- **...You need to ace your essay on the American Dream.** -\> Jump to
  Section 6: The American Dream and Its Discontents.

- **...You're interested in the Polish connection.** -\> Jump to Part V:
  Special Focus: *Wielki Gatsby* in Poland.

### Section 2: The Making of Gatsby: A Story of Hope and Despair

#### Fitzgerald's Own Gatsby Story

To understand *The Great Gatsby*, one must first understand that its
author, F. Scott Fitzgerald, was living out its central themes as he
wrote it. The novel’s exploration of aspiration, class anxiety, and the
desperate pursuit of an idealized love was not just fiction; it was the
story of his own life.<sup>8</sup>

##### Aspiration and Insecurity

Born in St. Paul, Minnesota, in 1896, Francis Scott Key Fitzgerald was
acutely aware of his family's precarious social standing.<sup>8</sup>
His father was an unsuccessful businessman, and the family depended on
his mother’s inheritance, leaving Fitzgerald with a lifelong feeling of
being an "outsider" among the monied elite. This deep-seated inferiority
complex became a primary engine of his fiction. His time at Princeton
University further cemented this dynamic; he largely neglected his
studies to hone his literary craft, writing for the university's
Triangle Club musicals and literary magazines, but his poor grades led
to academic probation and his eventual departure without a degree in
1917 to join the army.<sup>8</sup> Like his future protagonist,
Fitzgerald was a man driven by a powerful dream of distinction,
constantly brushing up against a world of established privilege that he
felt just beyond his grasp.

##### Love and Money

This dynamic came to a head in 1918 when, as a second lieutenant
stationed near Montgomery, Alabama, he met and fell desperately in love
with Zelda Sayre, the vibrant, wild, and celebrated daughter of an
Alabama Supreme Court judge.<sup>8</sup> Zelda, however, was unwilling
to marry a man with poor financial prospects. She broke off their
engagement, a rejection that seared into Fitzgerald the powerful
connection between love and money.<sup>8</sup> This experience became
his "most characteristic plotline": a young man of modest means striving
to prove himself worthy of a wealthier woman.

Fueled by this romantic ambition, Fitzgerald returned to St. Paul and
furiously rewrote his first novel, *This Side of Paradise*. Its
publication in 1920 was an overnight sensation, making the 24-year-old a
literary celebrity.<sup>9</sup> With fame and money finally in hand, he
won Zelda. They married just one week after the book's release and
launched into an extravagant, reckless lifestyle as the golden couple of
the Jazz Age, a term Fitzgerald himself popularized.<sup>8</sup> To fund
their non-stop parties and decadent living, Fitzgerald became a prolific
writer of short stories for mass-circulation magazines, most notably

*The Saturday Evening Post*, which paid him handsomely.<sup>10</sup>

##### The Escape to Europe

By 1924, this lifestyle had become unsustainable. Deep in debt after a
failed play and finding the constant parties of Great Neck, Long Island,
a distraction, the Fitzgeralds decided to escape to Europe. They moved
to the French Riviera so that Scott could finally focus on what he knew
would be his masterpiece, a novel that would secure his reputation as a
serious artist.<sup>10</sup> It was there, in a villa near
Saint-Raphaël, that he wrote the bulk of

*The Great Gatsby*.<sup>11</sup> However, the escape was not a cure-all.
Their marriage was strained, marked by Fitzgerald's increasing
alcoholism and Zelda's affair with a French naval aviator, an episode
that deepened the disillusionment that would permeate his great
novel.<sup>11</sup>

The novel itself became Fitzgerald's own version of Gatsby's dream. Just
as Gatsby amassed a fortune to win Daisy, Fitzgerald poured his artistic
energy into this book, hoping its success would solve his financial
woes, validate his literary genius, and perhaps even salvage his
turbulent marriage. The book was his personal "green light"—an object of
intense, desperate hope. The fact that the novel initially failed to
achieve this success was not just a professional disappointment; it was
a personal tragedy that mirrored the collapse of Gatsby's own dream.

#### From ***Trimalchio*** to ***Gatsby***

Before it became *The Great Gatsby*, the novel had several working
titles, the most significant being *Trimalchio in West
Egg*.<sup>10</sup> This title was a direct allusion to Trimalchio, a
character from the ancient Roman novel

*The Satyricon* by Petronius. Trimalchio is a vulgar, ostentatious
former slave who has become fantastically wealthy and throws incredibly
lavish parties to show off his fortune. This early title reveals that
Fitzgerald's initial conception of his protagonist was more harshly
satirical, emphasizing the crudeness of the "new money" class.

Fitzgerald completed a draft in 1924 and sent it to his editor at
Scribner's, the legendary Maxwell Perkins. Perkins was instrumental in
shaping the final novel, offering insightful suggestions for revision.
He persuaded Fitzgerald to change the title and to reorder key scenes to
heighten the mystery surrounding Gatsby's past.<sup>10</sup> Fitzgerald
spent the winter of 1924-1925 in Rome revising the manuscript, and by
the time it was published in April 1925, it had transformed from a sharp
satire into the complex, lyrical tragedy we know today.

#### Mind-Blown Moment: The Zelda Plagiarism Controversy

The creation of *Gatsby* is further complicated by the deep, and often
fraught, creative partnership between Scott and Zelda. While Zelda was
undoubtedly his muse, the line between inspiration and appropriation was
often blurry. Fitzgerald freely admitted to lifting material directly
from Zelda’s personal diaries and letters for his fiction, believing her
life and words were part of his artistic material.<sup>20</sup>

The most famous and undeniable example of this is one of the novel's
most iconic lines. In the book, Daisy Buchanan says of her newborn
daughter, "I'm glad it's a girl. And I hope she'll be a fool—that's the
best thing a girl can be in this world, a beautiful little
fool".<sup>21</sup> This line was taken almost verbatim from Zelda, who,
upon the birth of their daughter Scottie, reportedly said something
remarkably similar.<sup>13</sup>

This creative borrowing became a source of intense conflict. When Zelda,
during treatment at a mental hospital, wrote her own
semi-autobiographical novel, *Save Me the Waltz*, she used the shared
experiences of their marriage as material. Scott was furious, accusing
her of stealing "his" material, which he was planning to use for his own
novel, *Tender Is the Night*.<sup>11</sup> When Zelda accused him of
plagiarizing from her journals, he reportedly used her mental
instability to dismiss her claims, contributing to the "crazy woman"
stereotype that would haunt her legacy. While the full extent of Zelda's
contribution to

*Gatsby* is impossible to know, as many of her journals were destroyed,
it is clear that her voice, her wit, and her experiences are woven into
the very fabric of the novel.<sup>21</sup>

### Section 3: A Flop, A Revival, A Classic: The Unlikely Journey to Greatness

#### The Not-So-Great Reception (1925-1940)

*The Great Gatsby* was published by Charles Scribner's Sons on April 10,
1925, with a striking cover by artist Francis Cugat.<sup>4</sup>
Fitzgerald had immense hopes for the novel, proclaiming it a
"consciously artistic achievement" and predicting sales of 75,000 to
80,000 copies. He was wrong. The book was a commercial disappointment.
The first printing of 20,870 copies sold slowly, and by October 1925,
sales were under 20,000.<sup>23</sup> Fitzgerald attributed the poor
sales in part to the lack of an admirable female character to appeal to
the era's primary novel-buying audience: women.

The critical reception was equally disheartening. While some reviewers
praised Fitzgerald's brilliant and scintillating prose, many were
dismissive or confused.<sup>24</sup> The

*New York Herald Tribune* called it "a literary lemon meringue". H.L.
Mencken found the plot "improbable".<sup>24</sup> An anonymous reviewer
for

*America* magazine was scathing, calling it an "inferior novel" that was
"feeble in theme, in portraiture and even in expression". Fitzgerald
despaired, believing that "of all the reviews, even the most
enthusiastic, not one had the slightest idea what the book was about,"
particularly its symbolic, rather than realistic, intentions.

With the onset of the Great Depression, the novel was largely forgotten,
seen as a nostalgic relic of a bygone era of excess. When Fitzgerald
died of a heart attack in 1940 at the age of 44, he believed himself a
failure.<sup>9</sup> His obituaries were condescending, and in the year
of his death, his masterpiece earned him a paltry \$13.13 in
royalties.<sup>25</sup>

#### Gatsby Goes to War: The Armed Services Editions

The novel's resurrection came from a completely unexpected quarter: the
Second World War. In a massive initiative to boost troop morale, the
U.S. government, through the Council on Books in Wartime, began printing
and distributing millions of cheap, pocket-sized paperbacks to soldiers
serving overseas.<sup>28</sup> These were known as the Armed Services
Editions (ASEs).

In 1945, *The Great Gatsby* was selected for the program.<sup>25</sup>
An astonishing 155,000 copies were shipped to American GIs across the
globe.<sup>25</sup> For a generation of young men facing the chaos of
war, the novel's themes of unrequited love, disillusionment, and the
fragility of the American Dream resonated profoundly. This single act
created a massive, new, and passionate readership for a book that the
literary establishment had all but abandoned.

#### The Academic Canonization

The popular embrace of the novel by returning soldiers created a demand
that publishers were quick to meet. Scribner's issued new editions in
1945, and the book began its slow climb into the American
consciousness.<sup>25</sup> This populist revival forced the academic
world to take a second look.

Literary critics, many with ties to Fitzgerald's alma mater, Princeton
University, began to champion the work. Scholars like Arthur Mizener and
the influential critic Edmund Wilson (a college friend of Fitzgerald's)
published biographies and critical essays that re-evaluated the novel,
praising its complex structure, controlled point of view, and profound
thematic depth. This scholarly attention was crucial; as professors and
graduate students wrote about *Gatsby*, it began to appear on university
syllabi, and from there, trickled down into high school curricula. By
the 1960s, its journey was complete. The book that was once a commercial
flop had become a certified American classic, a mandatory text for
millions of students.<sup>4</sup>

This unique path to literary immortality subverts the typical story of
how a "classic" is made. The cultural gatekeepers of the 1920s—the
critics and the book-buying public—initially rejected the novel. Its
canonization was not a top-down process dictated by an intellectual
elite. Instead, it was a populist resurrection, sparked by a mass
audience of ordinary soldiers. Their embrace of the book forced the
academic world to reconsider a work it had dismissed. In a deeply ironic
twist, the novel that so brilliantly critiques America's rigid class
structure was itself saved from literary death not by the "East Egg"
establishment, but by the democratic, grassroots enthusiasm of the
American people.

## Part II: Deconstructing the Dream

### Section 4: The World of Gatsby: A Guide to the Roaring Twenties

To fully grasp *The Great Gatsby*, one must understand the turbulent and
transformative decade in which it is set. Fitzgerald himself coined the
term "the Jazz Age" to describe the 1920s, an era of unprecedented
economic prosperity, social upheaval, and cultural change that defined
modern America.<sup>1</sup>

#### The Jazz Age Unpacked

- **Post-War Society:** The novel is set in the summer of 1922, just
  four years after the end of World War I. The conflict had shattered
  old certainties and left a generation of young people, including
  Fitzgerald's own "Lost Generation" of expatriate writers, feeling
  disillusioned and disconnected from traditional values.<sup>1</sup>
  Both the narrator, Nick Carraway, and Jay Gatsby are veterans, and
  their war experiences are central to their identities and
  motivations.<sup>2</sup> Gatsby's service, in particular, is the
  catalyst for his entire quest, the moment he met Daisy and the
  starting point for his reinvention.

- **Prohibition and Crime:** The 18th Amendment, which banned the
  manufacture and sale of alcohol from 1920 to 1933, had the unintended
  consequence of creating a massive and highly profitable black
  market.<sup>2</sup> This is the engine of the novel's plot. Gatsby's
  immense fortune is built on bootlegging and other criminal
  enterprises, orchestrated by his associate Meyer Wolfsheim, a
  character based on the real-life gangster Arnold Rothstein, who was
  infamous for fixing the 1919 World Series.<sup>2</sup> The endless
  flow of illegal liquor at Gatsby's parties is a direct reflection of
  the era's widespread disregard for the law.

- **Economic Boom and Consumer Culture:** The 1920s was a period of
  soaring economic growth, fueled by the stock market and mass
  industrialization.<sup>2</sup> This new prosperity created a vibrant
  consumer culture. For the first time, products like automobiles were
  widely affordable, becoming powerful symbols of freedom and
  status.<sup>2</sup> Gatsby's "gorgeous" yellow car is the ultimate
  status symbol, but it also becomes the instrument of death and
  destruction, embodying the era's dangerous allure. The novel critiques
  this new materialism through one of its most powerful symbols: the
  giant, fading eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg on a billboard. In a
  world that has lost its moral compass, this advertisement for an
  oculist becomes a stand-in for the all-seeing eyes of God, suggesting
  that commerce and marketing have replaced religion as the nation's
  guiding force.<sup>2</sup>

- **The Flapper and New Womanhood:** The decade saw the emergence of the
  "flapper," a new archetype of the modern woman characterized by bobbed
  hair, shorter skirts, and a more liberated and independent lifestyle.
  In the novel, this figure is best represented by the cynical,
  athletic, and sexually liberated professional golfer, Jordan Baker.
  However, Fitzgerald also captures the deep societal anxiety
  surrounding this newfound female autonomy. Characters like Tom
  Buchanan express open disapproval of Jordan's behavior, revealing a
  culture as much threatened by women's emancipation as it was
  celebrating it.

#### Old Money vs. New Money

The novel’s social geography is defined by the conflict between two
distinct factions of the wealthy.

- **East Egg:** This is the home of the aristocracy, the "old money"
  families like the Buchanans who have inherited their wealth and social
  position over generations. Their world is seen as more fashionable,
  established, and exclusive.<sup>21</sup>

- **West Egg:** This is the domain of the *nouveau riche*, the "new
  money" crowd like Gatsby who have made their fortunes recently and
  often through questionable means. Their lifestyle is characterized by
  ostentatious displays of wealth, which the old money elite views as
  tasteless and vulgar.<sup>4</sup>  
    
  This clash is the novel's central social tension. Despite his
  incredible wealth, Gatsby can never truly be accepted into Daisy's
  world because he lacks the inherited status and pedigree of the East
  Egg clan.

#### Global Context: The World in 1922

While Gatsby's story unfolds on Long Island, the world beyond was also
in a state of profound flux. Placing the novel in a global context
reveals parallel currents of change and instability.

- **Poland:** The Second Polish Republic, newly independent after 123
  years of partition, was a young and fragile state. Having just
  survived the Polish-Soviet War (1919-1921), the country was grappling
  with establishing its borders, creating a stable political system, and
  battling crippling hyperinflation that would peak in 1923. It was a
  time of immense national pride but also deep uncertainty.

- **Germany:** The democratic Weimar Republic was experiencing its own
  "Golden Twenties" (*Goldene Zwanziger Jahre*), a period of explosive
  artistic and intellectual creativity in cities like Berlin. However,
  this cultural boom was set against a backdrop of political violence,
  economic crisis, and the humiliating terms of the Treaty of
  Versailles, creating a volatile atmosphere that would eventually lead
  to the rise of Nazism. The novel itself alludes to this, with rumors
  circulating that Gatsby might be a German spy or related to Kaiser
  Wilhelm.<sup>36</sup>

- **Elsewhere in the World:** In Italy, Benito Mussolini and his Fascist
  party were consolidating power after their March on Rome. The Irish
  Free State was established after a bitter civil war. And in Russia,
  the new Soviet Union was formally created, solidifying the world's
  first communist state.

### Section 5: Reading Between the Lines: Symbolism Across Cultures

Fitzgerald’s prose is dense with symbolism, using objects, colors, and
places to convey the novel's abstract themes of hope, decay, and the
elusive nature of the past.<sup>38</sup> While some of these symbols
resonate universally, others are deeply rooted in a specific American
context, posing challenges for readers and translators in different
cultures.

#### Core American Symbols

- **The Green Light:** This is the novel's most famous symbol. Situated
  at the end of Daisy's dock, the single green light that Gatsby stares
  at across the water represents his all-consuming dream of reuniting
  with her.<sup>38</sup> It is a symbol of hope, the future, and what
  Nick Carraway calls Gatsby's "extraordinary gift for
  hope".<sup>40</sup> On a broader level, Nick explicitly connects the
  light to the promise of America itself—the "fresh, green breast of the
  new world" that Dutch sailors first saw, an image of boundless
  possibility that has haunted the American imagination ever
  since.<sup>38</sup> The light is both intensely personal and deeply
  national.

- **The Valley of Ashes:** This desolate industrial wasteland, located
  between the wealthy enclaves of Long Island and the vibrant city of
  New York, is a powerful symbol of the moral and social decay that is
  the byproduct of the unrestrained pursuit of wealth.<sup>36</sup> It
  is the dumping ground for the city's industrial refuse, and it
  represents the forgotten underclass—people like George and Myrtle
  Wilson—whose lives are crushed and vitality drained by the careless
  indifference of the rich.<sup>4</sup> It is the grim reality hidden
  beneath the glittering facade of the Jazz Age.

- **The Eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg:** Brooding over the Valley of
  Ashes from a faded billboard are the "blue and gigantic" eyes of an
  oculist's advertisement.<sup>34</sup> In a world largely devoid of
  religion or moral authority, these commercial eyes become a substitute
  for the eyes of God.<sup>43</sup> For the grief-stricken George
  Wilson, they are a literal divine presence that sees and judges human
  sin.<sup>45</sup> More broadly, the symbol suggests that in modern
  America, God has been replaced by commerce. However, Fitzgerald also
  implies that symbols only have the meaning characters invest in them;
  the eyes themselves are just paint on a board, representing the
  essential meaninglessness of a world where people must invent their
  own moral codes.<sup>38</sup>

- **Colors:** Color symbolism is woven throughout the novel. **White**
  is consistently associated with Daisy, suggesting a facade of purity
  and innocence that conceals her moral hollowness.<sup>47</sup>  
  **Yellow and gold** represent wealth, but with a crucial distinction:
  gold often signifies "old money" and authenticity, while yellow (like
  Gatsby's car) suggests new, flashy, and ultimately fake
  wealth.<sup>7</sup>  
  **Blue**, particularly in connection with Gatsby's enchanted gardens,
  symbolizes his romantic illusions and dreams, while **grey** pervades
  the Valley of Ashes, signifying desolation and
  hopelessness.<sup>10</sup>

#### Cross-Cultural Analysis: Does Symbolism Translate?

The power of these symbols often shifts when viewed from outside an
American context. What is universal, and what gets lost in translation?

- **Universal vs. Specific:** The association of a light with hope is a
  near-universal concept, making the green light's core meaning
  accessible to most cultures.<sup>49</sup> Similarly, a wasteland
  representing decay is a common literary trope. However, the specific
  connection of the green light to the "American Dream" and the
  historical promise of the "New World" is deeply rooted in U.S. history
  and may not carry the same weight for a foreign reader without that
  cultural background.<sup>41</sup>

- **Lost in Translation:** The very language that carries this symbolism
  can be a barrier. The celebrated Japanese novelist Haruki Murakami,
  who translated *Gatsby*, has written extensively about this challenge.
  He argues that the novel's greatness lies in its "finely wrought" and
  "layered" language, and that the delicate stylistic nuances that
  create its atmosphere and symbolic resonance inevitably "lose at least
  a portion of \[their\] aroma, mellowness, and texture en
  route".<sup>50</sup> For Japanese readers, the result is a different,
  perhaps less symbolically rich, experience of the novel.<sup>50</sup>

- **A Polish Lens:** A Polish reader might interpret the novel's symbols
  through the filter of their own national experience. The Valley of
  Ashes could evoke images of the heavily industrialized and polluted
  landscapes of Silesia during the communist era. The stark division
  between "old money" East Egg and "new money" West Egg could resonate
  with historical tensions in Poland between the landed aristocracy
  (*szlachta*) and the rising urban bourgeoisie of the 19th century, or
  even the post-1989 emergence of a new class of oligarchs.

- **A Postcolonial Lens:** Contemporary academic theory offers another
  perspective. A postcolonial reading of the novel interprets Gatsby's
  entire project not just as a pursuit of love, but as an act of
  "mimicry".<sup>51</sup> In this view, Gatsby, as a member of a
  marginalized class, desperately imitates the cultural habits, speech
  ("Old Sport"), and values of the dominant "old money" class in an
  attempt to be accepted. His failure is thus a commentary on the rigid
  power structures that prevent the "colonized" from ever truly joining
  the ranks of the "colonizer".<sup>51</sup> This interpretation shifts
  the symbolic focus from the American Dream to the universal dynamics
  of class and power.

### Section 6: The American Dream and Its Discontents

At its heart, *The Great Gatsby* is a profound and pessimistic critique
of America's most cherished national myth: the American Dream. The novel
dissects the belief that anyone, through hard work and determination,
can rise from rags to riches, exposing it as a beautiful but ultimately
hollow illusion.<sup>52</sup>

#### A Critique of an Ideal

Fitzgerald portrays the American Dream of the 1920s as having been
corrupted. It is no longer a vision of building an honest life, but
simply a mad scramble to get rich by any means necessary.<sup>52</sup>
Jay Gatsby embodies this corruption. He achieves his immense wealth not
through honest labor but through illegal bootlegging and organized
crime.<sup>2</sup> His dream is not for a better future, but an
obsessive desire to recapture and repeat a single moment from the past,
a goal Nick Carraway recognizes as impossible.<sup>54</sup> The novel's
tragic conclusion suggests that this corrupted dream leads only to moral
decay and destruction. Gatsby's failure is not just personal; it is the
failure of a national ideal. He discovers that America is not a
meritocracy; a rigid and unforgiving class structure exists, and no
amount of "new money" can buy entry into the exclusive world of "old
money" represented by the Buchanans.<sup>53</sup>

The famous final lines of the novel crystallize this pessimistic view:
"So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into
the past".<sup>56</sup> This powerful metaphor suggests that the
forward-striving impulse of the American Dream is a futile struggle
against the powerful currents of history and personal memory. We believe
we are moving toward the future, but we are always being pulled back
into what we have lost.<sup>57</sup>

#### Philosophical Dimensions

The novel's critique of American society can be viewed through several
philosophical and ideological lenses.

- **Existentialism:** From an existentialist perspective, the characters
  in *Gatsby* live in a modern world where traditional moral and
  religious structures have collapsed, leaving them adrift.<sup>59</sup>
  They are "free" to create their own values and define their own
  existence. Gatsby is the ultimate existential hero in this reading:
  born James Gatz, he rejects his past and his given identity entirely,
  choosing to invent "Jay Gatsby," a new self built around his own
  chosen purpose—the pursuit of Daisy.<sup>60</sup> He lives and dies by
  this self-created meaning in a universe that is ultimately indifferent
  to his quest. The novel thus becomes a cautionary tale about the
  awesome and terrifying freedom of self-determination and the
  consequences of the choices one makes.<sup>61</sup>

- **Marxist Critique:** A Marxist analysis of the novel focuses on its
  stark depiction of class struggle and the ills of
  capitalism.<sup>63</sup> The world of  
  *Gatsby* is divided into three distinct classes: the old aristocracy
  (the Buchanans), who own the means of production and live lives of
  idle leisure; the *nouveau riche* bourgeoisie (Gatsby), who have
  accumulated capital through often illicit means; and the proletariat
  (the Wilsons), who are trapped in the "Valley of Ashes," the
  industrial wasteland created by the capitalist system.<sup>36</sup>
  The novel shows how the ruling class is morally bankrupt, careless,
  and destructive, ultimately destroying both the aspiring bourgeois
  Gatsby and the working-class Wilsons before retreating back into the
  safety of their immense wealth.<sup>56</sup>

- **Religion and Morality:** The world of *Gatsby* is a spiritual
  vacuum.<sup>43</sup> The characters are almost entirely secular, and
  traditional religious institutions are absent from the
  narrative.<sup>64</sup> The only semblance of a divine presence is the
  commercial billboard of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg, suggesting that God
  has either abandoned this society or been replaced by
  capitalism.<sup>34</sup> In this moral wasteland, the characters
  operate without an ethical compass, leading to infidelity, dishonesty,
  and ultimately, murder.<sup>44</sup> The novel serves as a powerful
  cautionary tale about the moral decay that results from a society that
  has lost its spiritual values in the pursuit of material
  wealth.<sup>44</sup>

## Part III: Gatsby Goes Global

### Section 7: The Great Gatsby in Translation

The journey of *The Great Gatsby* from an American novel to a global
classic is a story of translation. Its themes have crossed borders, but
not without being filtered through the unique linguistic and cultural
lenses of each new audience. The novel has been translated into over 40
languages, with each version representing a distinct act of
interpretation.<sup>65</sup>

#### A Global Timeline

The novel's international dissemination began almost immediately after
its American publication, but its spread was gradual, often accelerating
only after its mid-century revival in the United States.

| **Language** | **Title** | **First Known Translation** | **Translator** | **Publisher** | **Notes** |
|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| French | *Gatsby le Magnifique* | 1926 | Victor Llona | Éditions Kra | The first translation into any foreign language.<sup>66</sup> |
| German | *Der große Gatsby* | 1928 | Maria Lazar | O.C. Recht |  |
| Polish | *Wielki Gatsby* | 1962 | Ariadna Demkowska-Bohdziewicz | Czytelnik | For decades, this was the only Polish version available.<sup>37</sup> |
| Italian | *Il grande Gatsby* | 1936 | Cesare Giardini | Mondadori | As of 2018, there were at least 15 Italian translations.<sup>68</sup> |
| Japanese | *華麗なるギャツビー* (*Karei naru Gyatsubī*) | 1957 | Oku Toshiro | Arechi Shuppansha |  |
| Spanish | *El gran Gatsby* | 1946 | José Luis de Villalonga | Sur |  |
| Russian | *Великий Гэтсби* (*Velikiy Getsbi*) | 1965 | Evgeniya Kalashnikova | Khudozhestvennaya Literatura |  |

#### The Translator's Challenge: Case Studies

Translating *Gatsby* is not merely a matter of finding equivalent words;
it is about recreating a mood, a style, and a set of cultural
assumptions that are deeply American.

- **Japan: Translating an Atmosphere:** The celebrated Japanese novelist
  Haruki Murakami undertook his own translation of *Gatsby* in 2006, a
  project he described as a long-held personal ambition.<sup>69</sup> He
  felt that previous Japanese translations, while competent, failed to
  capture the novel's unique essence.<sup>50</sup> Murakami argued that
  Fitzgerald's "finely wrought" and "layered" prose is so delicate that
  it "doesn't travel well," losing its "aroma, mellowness, and texture"
  in translation.<sup>50</sup> His approach was deeply personal and
  novelistic; rather than a literal translation, he sought to recreate
  the  
  *feeling* of the book, asking himself, "If I were the author, how
  would I have written this?".<sup>50</sup> This highlights a key
  challenge: for a stylist like Fitzgerald, the meaning is inseparable
  from the music of the language, a music that is nearly impossible to
  replicate perfectly in another tongue.<sup>70</sup>

- **Poland: A Debate Over "Foreignness":** The history of *Gatsby* in
  Poland showcases a fascinating evolution in translation philosophy.
  For nearly 50 years, the only available translation was Ariadna
  Demkowska-Bohdziewicz's 1962 version.<sup>67</sup> In 2014, translator
  Jacek Dehnel published a new version and a critical essay arguing that
  the original translation had "normalized" or "domesticated"
  Fitzgerald's text.<sup>71</sup> He pointed out that Demkowska, working
  behind the Iron Curtain with limited resources, had simplified complex
  imagery and omitted culturally specific allusions that would have been
  obscure to Polish readers.<sup>71</sup> For example, a reference to a
  dancer moving "like Frisco" was simplified to "waves her
  arms".<sup>71</sup> Dehnel's translation, and several that followed
  after the novel entered the public domain in 2021, took the opposite
  approach, a strategy known as "foreignization".<sup>37</sup> These
  newer translations often include extensive footnotes to explain
  American cultural references like the 1919 Black Sox Scandal or the
  significance of railway magnate James J. Hill, preserving the text's
  "otherness" and challenging the Polish reader to engage with its
  foreign context.<sup>37</sup>

- **Untranslatable Elements:** Certain phrases, deeply embedded in a
  specific cultural and class context, pose immense challenges. Gatsby's
  signature phrase, "Old Sport," is a prime example. It is a carefully
  chosen affectation meant to signal an Anglophilic, "old money"
  background that Gatsby does not actually possess. Haruki Murakami
  noted that he wrestled with how to translate this phrase for 20 years
  before ultimately deciding there was no good Japanese equivalent; he
  left it in the original English.<sup>70</sup> This decision
  underscores how markers of class and identity are often the most
  difficult elements to carry across a cultural divide.

### Section 8: International Reception and Criticism

As *The Great Gatsby* traveled the world, it was met with a wide range
of interpretations, often reflecting the political and cultural
preoccupations of its new audience. The novel's ambiguities have allowed
it to function as a kind of cultural Rorschach test, with each society
seeing its own hopes and fears reflected in Gatsby's tragic story.

#### Academic Perspectives from Abroad

While early reviews from specific international literary journals are
scarce in available records, the academic reception in later decades
reveals distinct interpretive traditions.<sup>72</sup>

- **Postcolonial Reading:** Emerging from a global academic context,
  postcolonial theory offers a powerful lens for the novel. This
  approach views Gatsby's story as an allegory for the colonized
  subject's relationship with the colonizer.<sup>51</sup> Gatsby, from
  the "inferior" class, mimics the language, dress, and manners of the
  dominant "old money" elite in a desperate bid for acceptance. His
  ultimate failure and destruction are seen as an inevitable outcome of
  a power structure that will never allow an outsider to truly
  assimilate.<sup>51</sup>

- **Marxist Reading:** European intellectual traditions, with their
  strong history of Marxist thought, have often focused on the novel's
  potent critique of capitalism.<sup>63</sup> From this perspective, the
  novel is less about a tragic romance and more about the brutal
  realities of class warfare. The decadent, morally vacant bourgeoisie
  (the Buchanans) carelessly destroy the lives of both the aspiring
  Gatsby and the working-class Wilsons, demonstrating the inherent
  destructiveness and inequality of the capitalist system.<sup>63</sup>

- **German Reception:** The novel's themes of decline and societal decay
  found a particular resonance in Germany. Some analyses connect the
  mood of *Gatsby* to the work of the German philosopher Oswald
  Spengler, whose influential book *The Decline of the West* was widely
  debated during the Weimar Republic.<sup>75</sup> Spengler's theory of
  historical degeneration provided a framework for understanding
  Gatsby's story not just as an American tragedy, but as a symptom of a
  broader crisis in Western civilization.<sup>75</sup>

This pattern of interpretation demonstrates how a single text can be
refracted through different cultural prisms. In 1920s America, critics
saw a light, topical novel. In post-WWII America, academics saw a
profound critique of the American Dream. In post-communist Poland, the
story becomes an allegory for the rise of a new oligarchy. For a
Japanese novelist, it is a benchmark of stylistic perfection. For queer
theorists, it is a story of repressed desire. The novel's genius lies in
this very ambiguity; it does not provide answers but rather a
beautifully rendered set of questions about wealth, identity, and desire
that each new generation, in each new culture, must answer for itself.

#### Censorship and Controversy

While lauded as a classic, *The Great Gatsby* has also been a frequent
target of censorship, primarily within the United States. The challenges
almost always stem from its depiction of what some consider immoral
behavior.

- **Common Objections:** Parent groups and school boards have repeatedly
  challenged the book's inclusion in curricula due to its "language and
  sexual references," themes of "extramarital affairs," and depictions
  of "excessive drinking".<sup>76</sup>

- **Notable Challenges:** One of the most serious challenges occurred in
  1987, when the Baptist College in Charleston, South Carolina, formally
  objected to the novel's content.<sup>76</sup> That same year, the Bay
  County School District in Florida made similar claims.<sup>76</sup>

- **Contemporary Bans:** The novel continues to be challenged today. In
  the first half of the 2023-2024 school year, PEN America recorded
  thousands of book ban instances in the U.S., with classics like
  *Gatsby* often swept up in broader legislative efforts to restrict
  books that address themes of racial inequality or LGBTQ+ identity,
  even when those are not the novel's primary focus.<sup>79</sup>

## Part IV: The Enduring Legacy in the 21st Century

### Section 9: From Page to Screen and Beyond: Gatsby in Modern Media

A century after its publication, *The Great Gatsby* has proven to be
remarkably adaptable, its story continually reinterpreted across a vast
array of media. Each adaptation serves as a snapshot of its time,
emphasizing different aspects of the novel to speak to a new generation.

#### Major Adaptations of ***The Great Gatsby***

| **Year** | **Title** | **Medium** | **Director/Creator** | **Key Cast/Details** |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| 1926 | *The Great Gatsby* | Film (Silent) | Herbert Brenon | Warner Baxter (Gatsby), Lois Wilson (Daisy). Now a lost film.<sup>80</sup> |
| 1949 | *The Great Gatsby* | Film | Elliott Nugent | Alan Ladd (Gatsby), Betty Field (Daisy). A film noir interpretation.<sup>80</sup> |
| 1974 | *The Great Gatsby* | Film | Jack Clayton | Robert Redford (Gatsby), Mia Farrow (Daisy). Screenplay by Francis Ford Coppola.<sup>80</sup> |
| 1999 | *The Great Gatsby* | Opera | John Harbison (composer) | Premiered at the Metropolitan Opera.<sup>80</sup> |
| 2000 | *The Great Gatsby* | TV Movie | Robert Markowitz | Toby Stephens (Gatsby), Mira Sorvino (Daisy), Paul Rudd (Nick).<sup>80</sup> |
| 2007 | *The Great Gatsby: A Graphic Adaptation* | Graphic Novel | Nicki Greenberg | Whimsical adaptation with characters as anthropomorphic creatures.<sup>10</sup> |
| 2013 | *The Great Gatsby* | Film | Baz Luhrmann | Leonardo DiCaprio (Gatsby), Carey Mulligan (Daisy). Known for its lavish visuals and modern soundtrack.<sup>80</sup> |
| 2021 | *The Great Gatsby: A Graphic Novel Adaptation* | Graphic Novel | K. Woodman-Maynard | Watercolor adaptation praised for highlighting queer subtext.<sup>83</sup> |
| 2023 | *The Great Gatsby* | Musical | Jason Howland (music), Nathan Tysen (lyrics) | Premiered at Paper Mill Playhouse; opened on Broadway in 2024 starring Jeremy Jordan and Eva Noblezada.<sup>80</sup> |
| 2024 | *Gatsby: An American Myth* | Musical | Florence Welch (music/lyrics), Thomas Bartlett (music) | Premiered at the American Repertory Theater.<sup>80</sup> |

#### Film Adaptations: A Comparative Look

The four major film adaptations each offer a distinct vision of
Fitzgerald's world.

- The **1949 version**, starring Alan Ladd, leans into the aesthetics of
  film noir, emphasizing Gatsby's criminal underworld connections and
  framing the story as a morality tale.<sup>82</sup>

- The **1974 adaptation**, with Robert Redford and a screenplay by
  Francis Ford Coppola, is the most faithful to the text. It is renowned
  for its stunning period costumes and sets, but some critics found its
  tone too reserved and lacking the novel's energy.<sup>82</sup>

- The **2000 TV movie**, starring Toby Stephens and Paul Rudd, is a more
  modest and briskly paced version, though its lower budget is apparent
  in the less extravagant party scenes.<sup>82</sup>

- Baz Luhrmann's **2013 film**, starring Leonardo DiCaprio, is a
  cinematic spectacle. It captures the frenetic energy and decadence of
  the Jazz Age with dazzling visuals and a contemporary soundtrack
  featuring artists like Jay-Z and Lana Del Rey. While visually
  stunning, it takes significant liberties with the plot, framing the
  story through Nick Carraway's sessions in a sanatorium.<sup>82</sup>

#### Beyond the Big Screen

The novel's life extends far beyond cinema.

- **Theatre:** *Gatsby* has become a hot property for the stage. In
  recent years, two major musicals have emerged: a Broadway production
  with music by Jason Howland that opened in 2024, and *Gatsby: An
  American Myth* with music by Florence Welch (of Florence + The
  Machine), which premiered the same year.<sup>80</sup>

- **Graphic Novels & Comics:** Since the novel entered the public domain
  in 2021, there has been a surge of visual adaptations. These range
  from faithful renderings like the one by Fred Fordham and Aya Morton
  to more interpretive works. Nicki Greenberg's 2007 version reimagines
  the cast as whimsical, non-human creatures.<sup>10</sup> K.
  Woodman-Maynard's 2021 watercolor adaptation was praised for its
  visual exploration of the novel's queer subtext.<sup>83</sup> There
  are even explicitly queer retellings, such as a 2023 graphic novel
  from AWA that portrays Gatsby as a Black, gay man.<sup>83</sup>

- **Podcasts and Audio:** The story has found a home in the audio world
  through full-cast audio dramas, such as the radio play podcast series
  from the Columbus Civic Theater, and critical discussion podcasts like
  *Adapt or Perish*, which dedicates episodes to comparing the novel
  with its various adaptations.<sup>88</sup>

#### Digital Gatsby: Memes, Trends, and TikTok

In the 21st century, *Gatsby*'s cultural currency is most visible
online, where it has been absorbed into the fabric of social media.

- **Viral Moments:** The novel's characters and themes are frequently
  used in meme culture. A popular "He's/She's a 10, but..." meme format
  often features a Gatsby-inspired punchline, such as, "He's a 10, but
  he sits on his lawn every night staring at the green light on your
  dock".<sup>91</sup> The marketing for the 2024 Broadway musical
  successfully created viral moments on TikTok, with sound bites and
  clips of the actors spreading beyond the theater
  community.<sup>92</sup>

- **The \#oldmoney Aesthetic:** A significant and complex trend on
  platforms like TikTok and Instagram is the "#oldmoney" aesthetic. This
  trend romanticizes a lifestyle of quiet, inherited wealth, often using
  images from *Gatsby* adaptations and characters like Tom and Daisy
  Buchanan as visual inspiration.<sup>93</sup> However, this trend
  presents a sanitized and decontextualized version of the novel. It
  glorifies the very classism, racism, and moral carelessness that
  Fitzgerald was critiquing, stripping the story of its tragic weight
  and turning it into a mere style guide for aspirational
  consumerism.<sup>93</sup>

### Section 10: Why Gatsby Still Matters: Connections for Young Readers

Despite being a century old, *The Great Gatsby* continues to speak
powerfully to the experiences of young people navigating the
complexities of identity, love, and ambition.

#### Relatable Themes

- **Identity and Reinvention:** At its core, Gatsby's story is about
  self-invention. His transformation from the poor farm boy James Gatz
  to the mysterious millionaire Jay Gatsby is the ultimate act of
  creating a personal brand. In a world where young people are
  encouraged to curate their online personas, Gatsby's effort to build a
  new identity from scratch feels incredibly contemporary.

- **Unrequited Love and Obsession:** The intense, all-consuming, and
  ultimately unrequited nature of Gatsby's love for Daisy is a timeless
  theme. The pain of idealizing someone from afar, of loving someone you
  can't have, and the struggle to move on from a past relationship are
  experiences that resonate deeply with young readers.

- **Representation and Reinterpretation:** The novel's ambiguities have
  opened it up to fresh interpretations that make it relevant to modern
  discussions of identity.

  - **Queer Readings:** For decades, critics and readers have pointed to
    a homoerotic subtext in the novel, particularly in Nick Carraway's
    narration.<sup>94</sup> His descriptions of both Tom Buchanan's
    "cruel body" and his deep, almost worshipful admiration for Gatsby
    can be read as expressions of repressed queer desire.<sup>94</sup>
    The ambiguous scene in Chapter 2, where Nick blacks out at a party
    and wakes up to find himself half-dressed at the foot of Mr. McKee's
    bed, is often cited as a key moment of queer subtext.<sup>94</sup>

  - **Modern Retellings:** Contemporary authors have actively
    reinterpreted the novel to center marginalized voices. Nghi Vo's
    2021 novel *The Chosen and the Beautiful* retells the story from the
    perspective of Jordan Baker, reimagined as a queer Vietnamese
    adoptee. This version uses fantasy elements to explore the racism
    and sexism simmering just beneath the surface of Fitzgerald's
    original text, asking for whom, exactly, the 1920s were a "Golden
    Age".<sup>98</sup>

#### Fan Culture

The novel's entry into the public domain has coincided with the rise of
online fan culture, giving readers new ways to engage with and expand
upon the story.

- **Fanfiction:** *The Great Gatsby* has a surprisingly active
  fanfiction community. On the popular fanwork archive Archive of Our
  Own (AO3), the most prominent pairing is the slash relationship
  between Nick Carraway and Jay Gatsby.<sup>99</sup> As of March 2022,
  there were over 600 stories dedicated to this pairing, exploring the
  queer subtext of the novel in explicit detail. Some fanfiction has
  even made the leap to professional publication; A.J. Odasso's novel  
  *The Pursued and the Pursuing*, a queer retelling in which Gatsby
  survives, began as a fanfic.<sup>99</sup>

#### Cultural Impact

- **Influence on Writers:** The novel's lyrical style, tight structure,
  and thematic depth have had a profound influence on subsequent
  generations of American writers. Authors as diverse as the minimalist
  Raymond Carver and the sharp social critic Joan Didion have been cited
  as inheritors of Fitzgerald's literary legacy.<sup>101</sup>

- **Fashion:** Perhaps more than any other novel, *The Great Gatsby* has
  had a lasting impact on fashion.<sup>102</sup> It helped to codify the
  "flapper" style of the 1920s in the popular imagination, and its
  aesthetic of glamour and decadent excess is a perennial source of
  inspiration for designers.<sup>103</sup> Brands from Ralph Lauren to
  Miuccia Prada have created collections inspired by the book, and
  Miuccia Prada even collaborated on the costumes for the 2013
  film.<sup>104</sup> Interestingly, contemporary fashion often looks to
  the independent, androgynous style of Jordan Baker as much as to
  Daisy's feminine glamour, reflecting a modern appreciation for her
  character's defiance of traditional gender roles.<sup>104</sup>

## Part V: Special Focus: ***Wielki Gatsby*** in Poland

### Section 11: A History of ***Wielki Gatsby*** in Polish

The story of *The Great Gatsby* in Poland is a fascinating case study in
how a foreign classic is absorbed and reinterpreted over time, its
journey reflecting the nation's own changing cultural and political
landscape.

#### The Translation Timeline

The novel arrived in Poland relatively late, but its presence has grown
significantly, especially since it entered the public domain. There are
now at least six distinct Polish translations.

- **1962: The First Encounter:** The first Polish translation, *Wielki
  Gatsby*, was published by the state-owned publishing house Czytelnik.
  The translator was Ariadna Demkowska-Bohdziewicz.<sup>37</sup> For
  nearly half a century, this was the definitive—and for most readers,
  the only—version of the novel available in Poland.<sup>71</sup>

- **1994: A Second Voice:** A new translation by Jędrzej Polak was
  published, though it saw only a single printing and did not displace
  the classic 1962 version in the public consciousness.<sup>37</sup>

- **2013: A Critical Re-evaluation:** The acclaimed writer and
  translator Jacek Dehnel published a new translation that sparked a
  critical conversation about how *Gatsby* should be rendered in
  Polish.<sup>37</sup> In an influential translator's note, Dehnel
  critiqued the original 1962 translation, arguing it had smoothed over
  the original's stylistic quirks.<sup>71</sup>

- **2021-2022: The Post-Copyright Boom:** The novel's entry into the
  public domain in 2021 triggered a wave of new translations. These
  include a version by Kazimierz Cap, described by its publisher as a
  "literary reinterpretation" rather than a strict translation, and new
  versions by Arkadiusz Belczyk and Adam Zabokrzycki.<sup>37</sup> This
  sudden proliferation of translations signifies the novel's full
  integration into the modern Polish literary marketplace.

#### Translation Philosophies in Conflict

The differences between the Polish translations highlight a central
debate in translation theory: should a foreign text be "domesticated" to
feel natural to the new reader, or "foreignized" to preserve its
cultural and linguistic strangeness?

- **Domestication (Demkowska-Bohdziewicz, 1962):** Jacek Dehnel argued
  that the first translation, created in a period of cultural isolation
  behind the Iron Curtain, adopted a domesticating
  strategy.<sup>71</sup> Demkowska-Bohdziewicz often simplified
  Fitzgerald's more eccentric prose and either omitted or explained away
  culturally specific American references that a Polish reader in the
  1960s would not have understood. For instance, she changed
  Fitzgerald's racially charged description of Black characters rolling
  the "yolks of their eyeballs" to the more conventional "whites of
  their eyeballs" and translated a "lovely Jewess" as simply a "lovely
  girl," softening the original's ethnic and racial
  textures.<sup>71</sup>

- **Foreignization (Dehnel and others, post-2013):** The newer wave of
  translations has largely embraced a foreignizing
  approach.<sup>37</sup> Translators like Dehnel and Zabokrzycki make a
  conscious effort to preserve the "otherness" of the text. Instead of
  simplifying obscure references, they use extensive footnotes to
  provide Polish readers with the necessary historical and cultural
  context.<sup>37</sup> They explain the Black Sox Scandal of 1919, the
  significance of figures like James J. Hill, and the nuances of
  Prohibition-era slang.<sup>37</sup> This approach treats the Polish
  reader not as someone who needs the text simplified, but as an
  intellectually curious person willing to engage with a different
  cultural world.

### Section 12: Gatsby in the Polish Classroom

While *The Great Gatsby* is a cornerstone of the American high school
curriculum, its place in the Polish educational system is more
fluid.<sup>105</sup>

- **Kanon Lektur (The Reading Canon):** The novel is not typically part
  of the official, mandatory national reading list (*lektura
  obowiązkowa*) for Polish literature classes set by the Ministry of
  Education.<sup>107</sup> However, it is frequently read in schools as
  a supplementary text (  
  *lektura uzupełniająca*), particularly in classes with an advanced
  focus on humanities or in bilingual programs.<sup>108</sup> It is also
  a popular choice for school book clubs and is widely available in
  editions designed for Poles learning English, often with parallel text
  and vocabulary notes.<sup>109</sup>

- **Gatsby on the Matura:** The novel holds significant value for
  students preparing for the *matura*, Poland's comprehensive high
  school exit exam. The oral and written portions of the Polish language
  exam often require students to discuss themes by drawing on multiple
  literary works, including those from world literature. Polish study
  guides and cultural commentators frequently suggest using *The Great
  Gatsby* in *matura* essays, particularly by drawing a parallel between
  Jay Gatsby and Stanisław Wokulski, the protagonist of Bolesław Prus's
  canonical 19th-century Polish novel, *Lalka* (*The
  Doll*).<sup>112</sup> This comparison allows students to discuss
  universal themes of love, ambition, and social class through both an
  American and a Polish lens.

### Section 13: A Polish Reading of the American Dream

For Polish readers, *The Great Gatsby* is often interpreted through the
prism of their own national history and literary traditions, leading to
a unique cultural reception.

#### Critical Reception and the Wokulski Parallel

The most powerful and enduring point of connection for Polish critics
and readers is the striking similarity between Jay Gatsby and Stanisław
Wokulski from *Lalka*.<sup>113</sup>

*Lalka*, set in late 19th-century Warsaw, tells the story of Wokulski, a
man of lower-class origins who, through scientific talent and shrewd
business dealings, amasses a great fortune. His primary motivation is
his obsessive love for Izabela Łęcka, a beautiful but cold aristocrat
who embodies a dying social class. Like Gatsby, Wokulski uses his wealth
to try to win the love of an upper-class woman who is ultimately unable
to transcend the prejudices of her social sphere. Both protagonists are
romantic idealists who believe money can buy them access to a world of
grace and love, only to be tragically disillusioned. This parallel makes
Gatsby a familiar archetype for Polish readers, grounding Fitzgerald's
story of the American Dream in a deeply Polish narrative of class
struggle, social mobility, and romantic idealism.

#### Adaptations in Polish Culture

- **Theatre:** The novel's themes have been used to comment directly on
  contemporary Poland. In 2011, director Michał Zadara staged an
  adaptation at the Polish Theatre in Bydgoszcz that drew an explicit
  analogy between the Jazz Age America of the 1920s and the Poland of
  the previous two decades.<sup>114</sup> Zadara saw in Gatsby's world a
  reflection of post-1989 Poland, with its "intense regeneration of
  social hierarchies," the creation of "new elites and pseudoelites,"
  and the rise of a  
  *nouveau riche* class defined by "arrogance and
  ostentation".<sup>114</sup> The production updated the setting with
  modern gadgets like cell phones and contemporary obsessions like sushi
  to drive the point home.<sup>114</sup>

- **Pop Culture:** The aesthetic of *The Great Gatsby* has permeated
  Polish popular culture, inspiring numerous "Roaring Twenties" themed
  parties, events, and fashion trends, much like in other parts of the
  world.<sup>115</sup> A unique Polish cultural artifact is the 1975
  film poster created by Jerzy Flisak for the Polish release of the Jack
  Clayton film.<sup>118</sup> As a key figure in the highly regarded
  Polish School of Posters, Flisak eschewed a literal depiction of the
  film's stars. Instead, he created a surreal, metaphorical image—a
  cartoonish golfer in a zigzag sweater whose stance frames Daisy's
  doll-like head—that used visual wit to capture the novel's themes of
  materialism, illusion, and emptiness.<sup>118</sup>

This history of reception reveals how *The Great Gatsby* has served as a
mirror for Poland's own journey. When it first arrived in the Polish
People's Republic, it was likely read as a straightforward critique of
Western capitalist decadence. The deep-rooted comparison to Wokulski
from *Lalka* grounded the American story in a familiar Polish narrative
of national modernization and class conflict. After the fall of
communism in 1989, Zadara's theatrical adaptation used the novel as a
direct metaphor for the chaotic, aspirational, and often disillusioning
experience of Poland's own "Roaring Nineties." The recent explosion of
new translations signifies the novel's full absorption into a globalized
Polish literary market. Tracing how Poles have read, translated, and
adapted *Gatsby* over the past 60 years offers a unique window into
Poland's own complex relationship with capitalism and its version of
"the dream."

## Conclusion & Resources

### Section 14: So We Beat On: The Future of a Classic

A century after its quiet debut, *The Great Gatsby* has become more than
just a novel; it is a cultural touchstone, a myth, and a mirror. Its
journey from commercial flop to global classic is a testament to its
profound and enduring power. The novel's genius lies in its perfect,
shimmering balance between the specific and the universal. It is
immovably rooted in the sights, sounds, and anxieties of the American
Jazz Age, yet its story of love, loss, and the struggle to reinvent
oneself transcends its time and place.

The central symbols—the green light, the watching eyes, the valley of
ashes—are rendered with just enough ambiguity to invite endless
reinterpretation. Each new generation, each new culture, projects its
own dreams and disillusionments onto Gatsby's tragic quest. For soldiers
at war, it was a story of lost love and a home they might never see
again. For Polish directors after communism, it was a parable of the new
capitalism. For queer readers, it is a coded story of forbidden desire.
For TikTok creators, it is a visual aesthetic of "old money."

The novel endures because it refuses to provide easy answers. It
captures the intoxicating allure of the dream while mercilessly exposing
its hollowness. It gives us a hero of "extraordinary gift for hope"
whose entire life is built on a criminal enterprise and a lie. It is
this fundamental contradiction, this tension between illusion and
reality, that keeps us coming back. Like Nick Carraway, we are "within
and without, simultaneously enchanted and repelled." And so, we continue
to read, to argue, and to reinterpret, ensuring that *The Great Gatsby*,
like its protagonist, will forever be "borne back ceaselessly into the
past" to be discovered anew.

### Section 15: How to Spot Good Sources (A Guide for Students)

Navigating the world of information can be tough, especially when you're
writing a paper and need sources you can trust. Using high-quality
sources will not only get you better grades but will also make your
arguments stronger and more credible. Here’s a quick guide to sorting
the good from the bad.

**🟢 Trust these sources (High Reliability):**

- **University Websites and Academic Databases:** Sources from websites
  ending in.edu,.ac.uk, or.edu.pl are generally reliable. Databases like
  JSTOR, Project MUSE, ProQuest, and Google Scholar are treasure troves
  of peer-reviewed academic articles. These are the gold standard for
  research.

- **Peer-Reviewed Journals:** These are academic publications where
  articles are vetted by other experts in the field before being
  published. This process ensures a high level of accuracy and scholarly
  rigor.

- **Scholarly Books and University Presses:** Books published by
  university presses (e.g., Oxford University Press, Harvard University
  Press) or established academic publishers have undergone a rigorous
  editing and fact-checking process.

- **Major Museum and Library Archives:** Institutions like the Library
  of Congress, the Princeton University Library, or the British Library
  often have digital archives with primary sources like letters,
  manuscripts, and historical documents. These are invaluable.

- **Established News Organizations with Fact-Checking Standards:**
  Reputable newspapers like *The New York Times*, *The Guardian*, or
  *The Wall Street Journal* can be good for historical context and
  reception, but be aware of the difference between news reporting and
  opinion pieces.

- **🇵🇱 Polish Trusted Sources:** For research on the Polish context,
  look to institutions like **Culture.pl**, the **Instytut Książki**
  (Book Institute), and digital collections from the **Biblioteka
  Narodowa** (National Library) on **polona.pl**. Polish academic
  databases like **BazHum** and **CEJSH** are also excellent.

**🟡 Use with caution (Medium Reliability):**

- **Wikipedia:** Wikipedia is a fantastic starting point for getting an
  overview of a topic. However, it should never be your final source.
  The real value of a Wikipedia article is at the bottom: check the
  footnotes and bibliography for links to the original, reliable
  sources.

- **Reputable Blogs and Online Magazines:** Some online publications,
  like the *Asymptote Journal's* blog on literary translation or
  *Slate*, have high editorial standards. However, always check the
  author's credentials and see if they are citing their sources.

- **YouTube/BookTube/TikTok:** These platforms can offer interesting
  perspectives and analyses, but their reliability varies wildly. Check
  who the creator is. Are they a university professor, a PhD student, or
  just a fan? Use their ideas as starting points for your own research,
  but don't cite them as factual sources unless the creator is a
  verified expert.

- **🇵🇱 Polish Cautionary Sources:** Websites like **Lubimyczytać.pl**
  are great for gauging popular reader opinion in Poland, similar to
  Goodreads, but the reviews are not academic sources. Student forums
  can offer insights but are not reliable for facts.

**🔴 Avoid these (Low Reliability):**

- **Anonymous Posts and Un-cited Websites:** If you can't tell who wrote
  it and where they got their information, don't use it.

- **Essay Mills and Student Homework Sites:** Websites that host
  pre-written student essays are often full of errors, outdated
  information, and plagiarism. **🇵🇱 In Poland, avoid sites like
  Bryka.pl, Sciaga.pl, and similar "opracowania" sites.** They are
  notoriously unreliable for serious academic work.

- **AI-Generated Content without Verification:** While AI tools can help
  summarize information, they can also "hallucinate" or make up facts
  and sources. Never use AI-generated content in a paper without
  verifying every single claim with a primary or high-quality secondary
  source.

- **Clickbait and Ad-Heavy Sites:** If a website seems more interested
  in getting you to click on ads than providing solid information, it's
  probably not a reliable source.

Pro Tip: The Rule of Three

If you find a surprising or "too good to be true" fact, try to confirm
it with at least three different, independent, high-quality sources. If
you can't, it might not be accurate. Smart research isn't just about
finding information; it's about knowing you can trust it.

### Section 16: Comprehensive Bibliography

#### A. Primary Sources

- Fitzgerald, F. Scott. *The Great Gatsby*. Charles Scribner's
  Sons, 1925. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Fitzgerald, F. Scott. *F. Scott Fitzgerald's Ledger: A Facsimile*.
  Edited by Matthew J. Bruccoli, NCR Microcard Editions, 1972.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (See also digital version at University of South Carolina
  Libraries <sup>119</sup>).

- Fitzgerald, F. Scott. *The Letters of F. Scott Fitzgerald*. Edited by
  Andrew Turnbull, Charles Scribner's Sons, 1963. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Fitzgerald, F. Scott. *A Life in Letters*. Edited by Matthew J.
  Bruccoli, Charles Scribner's Sons, 1994. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- F. Scott Fitzgerald Papers (C0187). Manuscripts Division, Department
  of Special Collections, Princeton University Library. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
  (Contains original manuscript of *The Great Gatsby* <sup>66</sup>).

- Fitzgerald, Zelda. *Save Me the Waltz*. Charles Scribner's Sons, 1932.
  ⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### B. Secondary Sources

##### Polish Sources

- Chałupnik, Agata. "The Great Gatsby, dir. Michał Zadara."
  *Biweekly.pl*, July 2011. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Review of a major Polish
  theatrical adaptation <sup>114</sup>).

- Dehnel, Jacek. "Gatsby in Translationland: A Polish 'Gatsby' in the
  21st Century." *Asymptote Journal Blog*, 10 Apr. 2014. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
  (Translator's note on the challenges of translating Gatsby into Polish
  <sup>71</sup>).

- Kofta, Krystyna, et al. "'Wielki Gatsby' - trudna kariera dobrej
  książki." *Polskie Radio Dwójka*, 11 June 2013. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Radio
  discussion comparing Gatsby to Polish literary character Wokulski
  <sup>113</sup>).

- Warzycki, Kamil. "Selected cultural elements and allusions in five
  Polish translations of F. Scott Fitzgerald's 'The Great Gatsby'."
  *Beyond Philology*, no. 24, 2023, pp. 127-148. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Detailed
  academic analysis of Polish translations <sup>37</sup>).

##### English Sources (Academic Books & Journals)

- Beuka, Robert. "Twenty-First-Century G: The Great Gatsby As Cultural
  Icon." *Twentieth-Century Literary Criticism*, edited by Lawrence J.
  Trudeau, vol. 311, Gale, 2015. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Analysis of the novel's
  modern cultural relevance ).

- Bruccoli, Matthew J. *Some Sort of Epic Grandeur: The Life of F. Scott
  Fitzgerald*. University of South Carolina Press, 2002. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Churchwell, Sarah. *Careless People: Murder, Mayhem, and the Invention
  of The Great Gatsby*. Virago Press, 2014. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Curnutt, Kirk, editor. *The Cambridge Companion to F. Scott
  Fitzgerald*. Cambridge University Press, 2007. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Contains
  chapter on Fitzgerald's expatriate years ).

- Garrett, George. "Fire and Freshness: A Matter of Style in The Great
  Gatsby." *New Essays on The Great Gatsby*, edited by Matthew J.
  Bruccoli, Cambridge University Press, 1985, pp. 101-115. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐
  (Discusses influence on contemporary writers <sup>101</sup>).

- Kazin, Alfred. *On Native Grounds: An Interpretation of Modern
  American Prose Literature*. Harcourt, Brace & World, 1942. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Maklad, Ahmed. "Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby: Critical
  reception and visual interpretation." MA Thesis, The American
  University in Cairo, 2015. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Thesis on the novel's reception
  history and adaptations <sup>121</sup>).

- Mizener, Arthur. *The Far Side of Paradise: A Biography of F. Scott
  Fitzgerald*. Houghton Mifflin, 1951. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Pelas, Zofia. "THE BEAUTIFUL AND THE DAMNED: THE INFLUENCE OF ZELDA
  FITZGERALD ON F. SCOTT FITZGERALD'S LIFE AND LITERARY OUTPUT."
  *Annales Universitatis Paedagogicae Cracoviensis Studia Anglica*, vol.
  5, 2015, pp. 59-67. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Analyzes Zelda's influence and the
  "beautiful little fool" quote ).

- Streissguth, Tom. *F. Scott Fitzgerald: The Man and His Work*. Enslow
  Publishing, 2014. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

- Tyson, Lois. *Critical Theory Today: A User-Friendly Guide*. 3rd ed.,
  Routledge, 2015. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Includes queer theory analysis of Nick
  Carraway <sup>95</sup>).

- Zeven, Needje, and Aletta G. Dorst. "A beautiful little fool?
  Retranslating Daisy Buchanan in The Great Gatsby." *Perspectives:
  Studies in Translation Theory and Practice*, vol. 29, no. 5, 2021, pp.
  753-769. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Analysis of Dutch translations and gender
  stereotyping <sup>68</sup>).

##### English Sources (Popular & Digital)

- "Adaptations of The Great Gatsby." *Wikipedia*, Wikimedia Foundation,
  2 July 2025. ⭐⭐⭐ (Comprehensive list of adaptations <sup>80</sup>).

- "A Brief Life of Fitzgerald." *University of South Carolina
  Libraries*,
  sc.edu/about/offices_and_divisions/university_libraries/browse/irvin_dept_special_collections/collections/matthew_arlyn_bruccoli_collection_of_f_scott_fitzgerald/life_of_fitzgerald/.
  Accessed 10 July 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Detailed biography from a major
  archive ).

- "Banned Books Awareness: 'The Great Gatsby'." *Deep Forest
  Productions*, 25 Nov. 2012. ⭐⭐⭐ (Discusses reasons for censorship
  attempts <sup>77</sup>).

- "Biography." *F. Scott Fitzgerald Society*,
  fscottfitzgeraldsociety.org/about-us-2/biography/. Accessed 10
  July 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Authoritative biography from the leading
  scholarly society ).

- "F. Scott Fitzgerald." *Biography.com*, A&E Networks Television, 10
  Apr. 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ (General biography ).

- Hartmann, Cristina. "Why did it take so long for Fitzgerald's story to
  be recognized as a masterpiece?" *Slate*, 15 Mar. 2015. ⭐⭐⭐⭐
  (Explains the initial poor sales ).

- "How Princetonians Saved 'The Great Gatsby'." *Princeton Alumni
  Weekly*, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Details the role of Princeton and the Armed
  Services Editions in the novel's revival ).

- Muntean, V., and M. M. Zgaga. "The elements of popular culture in 'The
  Great Gatsby'." *International Journal of Scientific and Research
  Publications*, vol. 7, no. 4, 2017. ⭐⭐⭐ (Analysis of pop culture
  elements within the novel ).

- Murakami, Haruki. "Haruki Murakami on Translating The Great Gatsby."
  *Columbia University Press Blog*, 7 May 2013. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Murakami's
  personal essay on translating the novel <sup>50</sup>).

- "The Not-So-Great Gatsby." *Library of Congress Blogs: Bibliomania*,
  10 Apr. 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Details on the initial poor reception from a
  major national archive ).

- Rothman, Lily. "8 Ways 'The Great Gatsby' Captured the Roaring
  Twenties—and Its Dark Side." *History.com*, 28 May 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐
  (Excellent summary of historical context ).

- Stagg, Guy. "Gatsby, still great at 100." *Engelsberg Ideas*, 25
  Mar. 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Analysis of the novel's enduring relevance and
  European influences <sup>124</sup>).

- "The Great Gatsby F. Scott Fitzgerald and The Great Gatsby
  Background." *SparkNotes*,
  [<u>sparknotes.com/lit/gatsby/context/</u>](https://sparknotes.com/lit/gatsby/context/).
  Accessed 10 July 2025. ⭐⭐⭐ (Good overview of Fitzgerald's life and
  historical context ).

- "The Great Gatsby: Publication History." *PrepScholar*,
  [<u>blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-novel-history</u>](https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-novel-history).
  Accessed 10 July 2025. ⭐⭐⭐⭐ (Detailed timeline of publication and
  reception ).

##### Missing Sources Note

- **Early International Reviews:** While the report discusses the
  international reception of the novel from an academic standpoint,
  specific, contemporaneous reviews from the 1920s and 1930s in
  non-English language literary journals (e.g., France's *La Nouvelle
  Revue Française*, Germany's *Die literarische Welt*, or Poland's
  *Wiadomości Literackie*) were not available in the provided research
  material. Accessing these would require specialized archival research
  and would provide a more granular understanding of the novel's initial
  journey abroad.

- **Polish Curriculum Data:** The exact status of *Wielki Gatsby* within
  the official Polish Ministry of Education's national curriculum
  (*podstawa programowa*) for high schools requires further verification
  from official government sources. While its presence in Polish schools
  is confirmed, its precise designation as mandatory or supplementary is
  an area for further research.

- **Matura Exam Statistics:** While the novel's relevance to the
  *matura* is discussed anecdotally, statistical data on how frequently
  it appears in exam questions or is used by students in their essays
  would require analysis of Polish educational board archives.

- **Digital and Social Media Analytics:** Claims about the popularity of
  trends like \#oldmoney or specific memes are based on cultural
  reporting. Quantitative data from platforms like TikTok or Instagram
  on view counts, hashtag usage, and user demographics would provide a
  more robust analysis of the novel's digital footprint.

#### Cytowane prace

1.  The elements of popular culture in “The Great Gatsby” -
    International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ijsrp.org/research-paper-0417/ijsrp-p6458.pdf</u>](https://www.ijsrp.org/research-paper-0417/ijsrp-p6458.pdf)

2.  8 Ways 'The Great Gatsby' Captured the Roaring Twenties—and Its ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.history.com/articles/great-gatsby-roaring-twenties-fitzgerald-dark-side</u>](https://www.history.com/articles/great-gatsby-roaring-twenties-fitzgerald-dark-side)

3.  Why 'The Great Gatsby' still resonates a century after publication,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://cssh.northeastern.edu/wgss/why-the-great-gatsby-still-resonates-a-century-after-publication/</u>](https://cssh.northeastern.edu/wgss/why-the-great-gatsby-still-resonates-a-century-after-publication/)

4.  The Great Gatsby \| Summary, Characters, Reception, & Analysis \|
    Britannica, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Great-Gatsby</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Great-Gatsby)

5.  The Lessons of the Great Gatsby in the Digital Age \| by Ray N. \|
    Medium, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://medium.com/@ray123689/the-lessons-of-the-great-gatsby-in-the-digital-age-5195d5b5344d</u>](https://medium.com/@ray123689/the-lessons-of-the-great-gatsby-in-the-digital-age-5195d5b5344d)

6.  The American Dream in Crisis: Lessons from The Great Gatsby for
    Today's Society - Medium, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://medium.com/@hapisemilab/the-american-dream-in-crisis-lessons-from-the-great-gatsby-for-todays-society-a54240c40294</u>](https://medium.com/@hapisemilab/the-american-dream-in-crisis-lessons-from-the-great-gatsby-for-todays-society-a54240c40294)

7.  What Makes “THE GREAT GATSBY” by F.S. FITZGERALD GREAT?, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=379a2e5fc426374fd332bce569c2cc8d18ff9b30</u>](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=379a2e5fc426374fd332bce569c2cc8d18ff9b30)

8.  F. Scott Fitzgerald and The Great Gatsby Background \| SparkNotes,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gatsby/context/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gatsby/context/)

9.  F. Scott Fitzgerald – F. Scott Fitzgerald Society, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://fscottfitzgeraldsociety.org/about-us-2/biography/</u>](https://fscottfitzgeraldsociety.org/about-us-2/biography/)

10. F. Scott Fitzgerald and The Great Gatsby - MU Libraries - University
    of Missouri, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://library.missouri.edu/news/special-collections/f-scott-fitzgerald-and-the-great-gatsby</u>](https://library.missouri.edu/news/special-collections/f-scott-fitzgerald-and-the-great-gatsby)

11. A Brief Life of Fitzgerald - University Libraries \| University of
    South ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://sc.edu/about/offices_and_divisions/university_libraries/browse/irvin_dept_special_collections/collections/matthew_arlyn_bruccoli_collection_of_f_scott_fitzgerald/life_of_fitzgerald/</u>](https://sc.edu/about/offices_and_divisions/university_libraries/browse/irvin_dept_special_collections/collections/matthew_arlyn_bruccoli_collection_of_f_scott_fitzgerald/life_of_fitzgerald/)

12. F. Scott Fitzgerald: Biography, Author, 'The Great Gatsby' Writer,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.biography.com/authors-writers/f-scott-fitzgerald</u>](https://www.biography.com/authors-writers/f-scott-fitzgerald)

13. (PDF) " THE BEAUTIFUL AND THE DAMNED " : THE INFLUENCE ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281004866_THE_BEAUTIFUL_AND_THE_DAMNED_THE_INFLUENCE_OF_ZELDA_FITZGERALD_ON_F_SCOTT_FITZGERALD'S_LIFE_AND_LITERARY_OUTPUT</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281004866_THE_BEAUTIFUL_AND_THE_DAMNED_THE_INFLUENCE_OF_ZELDA_FITZGERALD_ON_F_SCOTT_FITZGERALD'S_LIFE_AND_LITERARY_OUTPUT)

14. The Great Gatsby and Charleston, a love story? - Histoire de bal,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.histoiredebal.com/en/2024/12/21/gatsby-le-magnifique-et-le-charleston-une-histoire-damour/</u>](https://www.histoiredebal.com/en/2024/12/21/gatsby-le-magnifique-et-le-charleston-une-histoire-damour/)

15. F. Scott Fitzgerald - Saint-Tropez, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.seesainttropez.com/famous/f-scott-fitzgerald-684001</u>](https://www.seesainttropez.com/famous/f-scott-fitzgerald-684001)

16. Fitzgerald's Expatriate Years and the European Stories (Chapter 6
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-f-scott-fitzgerald/fitzgeralds-expatriate-years-and-the-european-stories/D518A147FDC3C3AD3B1DF38ED3DB01EF</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-companion-to-f-scott-fitzgerald/fitzgeralds-expatriate-years-and-the-european-stories/D518A147FDC3C3AD3B1DF38ED3DB01EF)

17. Scott Fitzgerald: A Biography by Jeffrey Meyers\<., otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://fitzgerald.narod.ru/bio/meyers-bio06.html</u>](https://fitzgerald.narod.ru/bio/meyers-bio06.html)

18. Nostalgia For What Never Was: Exploring Myth in The Great Gatsby -
    Hawksites, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://hawksites.newpaltz.edu/sr35/nostalgia-for-what-never-was-exploring-myth-in-the-great-gatsby/</u>](https://hawksites.newpaltz.edu/sr35/nostalgia-for-what-never-was-exploring-myth-in-the-great-gatsby/)

19. The Great Gatsby \| Life in the Realm of Fantasy, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://conniejjasperson.com/tag/the-great-gatsby/</u>](https://conniejjasperson.com/tag/the-great-gatsby/)

20. How much of F. Scott Fitzgerald's work was actually taken from /
    written by Zelda Fitzgerald? : r/AskLiteraryStudies - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/AskLiteraryStudies/comments/hxakny/how_much_of_f_scott_fitzgeralds_work_was_actually/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskLiteraryStudies/comments/hxakny/how_much_of_f_scott_fitzgeralds_work_was_actually/)

21. How Did Zelda Influence The Great Gatsby - 1140 Words -
    Bartleby.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bartleby.com/essay/How-Did-Zelda-Influence-The-Great-Gatsby-94CCCFF62F92D9A7</u>](https://www.bartleby.com/essay/How-Did-Zelda-Influence-The-Great-Gatsby-94CCCFF62F92D9A7)

22. The Tragedy of Zelda Fitzgerald It Not As Clear As it Seems - Our
    Era Magazine, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.oureramag.com/archive/o9kqy20tcw2akv21taoafrm0hl3l7m</u>](https://www.oureramag.com/archive/o9kqy20tcw2akv21taoafrm0hl3l7m)

23. www.mullinsbooks.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.mullinsbooks.com/pages/press/7/publication-history-of-the-great-gatsby#:~:text=Publication%20History%20of%20%22The%20Great%20Gatsby%22%20First%20Edition%20and%20Subsequent%20Printings&text=Early%201925%3A%20Plates%20for%20the,copies%20of%20the%20first%20printing.</u>](https://www.mullinsbooks.com/pages/press/7/publication-history-of-the-great-gatsby#:~:text=Publication%20History%20of%20%22The%20Great%20Gatsby%22%20First%20Edition%20and%20Subsequent%20Printings&text=Early%201925%3A%20Plates%20for%20the,copies%20of%20the%20first%20printing.)

24. The Great Gatsby - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Great_Gatsby</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Great_Gatsby)

25. The Not-So-Great Gatsby \| Bibliomania - Library of Congress Blogs,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blogs.loc.gov/bibliomania/2025/04/10/the-not-so-great-gatsby/</u>](https://blogs.loc.gov/bibliomania/2025/04/10/the-not-so-great-gatsby/)

26. Why Did It Take So Long for The Great Gatsby to Be Recognized as a
    Masterpiece?, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://slate.com/human-interest/2015/03/great-gatsby-why-did-it-take-so-long-for-fitzgerald-s-story-to-be-recognized-as-a-masterpiece.html</u>](https://slate.com/human-interest/2015/03/great-gatsby-why-did-it-take-so-long-for-fitzgerald-s-story-to-be-recognized-as-a-masterpiece.html)

27. 'The Great Gatsby' got a bad review in America. A century later, how
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.americamagazine.org/arts-culture/2025/04/15/cbc-column-f-scott-fitzgerald-250406</u>](https://www.americamagazine.org/arts-culture/2025/04/15/cbc-column-f-scott-fitzgerald-250406)

28. How Princetonians Saved 'The Great Gatsby' \| Princeton Alumni ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://paw.princeton.edu/article/how-princetonians-saved-great-gatsby</u>](https://paw.princeton.edu/article/how-princetonians-saved-great-gatsby)

29. Everything You Need to Know: History of The Great Gatsby - Blog
    PrepScholar, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-novel-history</u>](https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-novel-history)

30. The Great Gatsby: A Modernist Masterpiece - Number Analytics,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.numberanalytics.com/blog/great-gatsby-modernist-literature-guide</u>](https://www.numberanalytics.com/blog/great-gatsby-modernist-literature-guide)

31. Frankenstein \| Databases Explored from Gale, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.gale.com/intl/databases-explored/literature/the-great-gatsby</u>](https://www.gale.com/intl/databases-explored/literature/the-great-gatsby)

32. Are the Rich Different?: Creating a Culture of Wealth in The Great
    Gatsby, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.jaas.gr.jp/jjas/pdf/2011/05_089-107.pdf</u>](https://www.jaas.gr.jp/jjas/pdf/2011/05_089-107.pdf)

33. The Great Gatsby's Creative Destruction - Reason.com, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://reason.com/2013/05/02/the-great-gatsbys-creative-destruction/</u>](https://reason.com/2013/05/02/the-great-gatsbys-creative-destruction/)

34. Not as advertised: The false god in 'The Great Gatsby' - Religion
    News Service, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://religionnews.com/2025/04/09/not-as-advertised-the-false-god-in-the-great-gatsby/</u>](https://religionnews.com/2025/04/09/not-as-advertised-the-false-god-in-the-great-gatsby/)

35. The Great Gatsby: Analysis of Setting \| EBSCO Research Starters,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/great-gatsby-analysis-setting</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/great-gatsby-analysis-setting)

36. The Great Gatsby: Of Real and Fake Gold - Bookophile, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bookophile.com/en/worlds-of-books/articles/the-great-gatsby-of-real-and-fake-gold</u>](https://www.bookophile.com/en/worlds-of-books/articles/the-great-gatsby-of-real-and-fake-gold)

37. (PDF) Selected cultural elements and allusions in five Polish ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/378252335_Selected_cultural_elements_and_allusions_in_five_Polish_translations_of_F_Scott_Fitzgerald's\_'The_Great_Gatsby'</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/378252335_Selected_cultural_elements_and_allusions_in_five_Polish_translations_of_F_Scott_Fitzgerald's_'The_Great_Gatsby')

38. The Great Gatsby: Symbols - SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gatsby/symbols/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/gatsby/symbols/)

39. Best Analysis: Green Light in The Great Gatsby - Blog PrepScholar,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-green-light-symbol</u>](https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-green-light-symbol)

40. What are your favourite Gatsby passages and/or quotes? : r/books -
    Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/1i8ig0/what_are_your_favourite_gatsby_passages_andor/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/1i8ig0/what_are_your_favourite_gatsby_passages_andor/)

41. What Does the Green Light Symbolize in the Great Gatsby? - College
    Transitions, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.collegetransitions.com/blog/what-does-the-green-light-symbolize-in-the-great-gatsby/</u>](https://www.collegetransitions.com/blog/what-does-the-green-light-symbolize-in-the-great-gatsby/)

42. Symbolism Of The Eyes Of God In The Great Gatsby - 796 Words -
    Bartleby.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Symbolism-Of-The-Eyes-Of-God-In-PY4ZYRMF9W6</u>](https://www.bartleby.com/essay/Symbolism-Of-The-Eyes-Of-God-In-PY4ZYRMF9W6)

43. God in the Great Gatsby \| A Novel View of American History,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://muse.union.edu/his226-wi18/2018/02/27/god-in-the-great-gatsby/</u>](https://muse.union.edu/his226-wi18/2018/02/27/god-in-the-great-gatsby/)

44. Christianity in the Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald - By Faith,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://byfaith.org/2025/01/18/christianity-in-the-great-gatsby-by-f-scott-fitzgerald/</u>](https://byfaith.org/2025/01/18/christianity-in-the-great-gatsby-by-f-scott-fitzgerald/)

45. Best Analysis: Eyes of TJ Eckleburg in The Great Gatsby - Blog
    PrepScholar, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-dr-tj-eckleburg-eyes-symbol</u>](https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-dr-tj-eckleburg-eyes-symbol)

46. The eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg and the diagnostic gaze as moral
    authority in The Great Gatsby - Hektoen International, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://hekint.org/2017/01/27/the-eyes-of-doctor-t-j-eckleburg-and-the-diagnostic-gaze-as-moral-authority-in-the-great-gatsby/</u>](https://hekint.org/2017/01/27/the-eyes-of-doctor-t-j-eckleburg-and-the-diagnostic-gaze-as-moral-authority-in-the-great-gatsby/)

47. Symbolic Meanings of Colors in The Great Gatsby \| ZHANG \| Studies
    in Literature and Language - CSCanada, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.cscanada.net/index.php/sll/article/view/7178</u>](http://www.cscanada.net/index.php/sll/article/view/7178)

48. Conflicts of Colors in The Great Gatsby - David Publishing Company,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.davidpublisher.com/Public/uploads/Contribute/658e86f861616.pdf</u>](https://www.davidpublisher.com/Public/uploads/Contribute/658e86f861616.pdf)

49. The Green Light — Meaning & Symbolism in The Great Gatsby, Titanic -
    The Monocled Mutineer, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.monocledmutineer.co.uk/the-green-light-great-gatsby/</u>](https://www.monocledmutineer.co.uk/the-green-light-great-gatsby/)

50. Haruki Murakami on Translating The Great Gatsby - Columbia ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://cupblog.org/2013/05/07/haruki-murakami-on-translating-the-great-gatsby/</u>](https://cupblog.org/2013/05/07/haruki-murakami-on-translating-the-great-gatsby/)

51. (PDF) MIMICRY AND HYBRIDITY IN THE FILM THE GREAT ..., otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/365978804_MIMICRY_AND_HYBRIDITY_IN_THE_FILM_THE_GREAT_GATSBY_A_POSTCOLONIAL_STUDY</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/365978804_MIMICRY_AND_HYBRIDITY_IN_THE_FILM_THE_GREAT_GATSBY_A_POSTCOLONIAL_STUDY)

52. The American Dream Theme Analysis - The Great Gatsby - LitCharts,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-great-gatsby/themes/the-american-dream</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-great-gatsby/themes/the-american-dream)

53. Best Analysis: The American Dream in The Great Gatsby - Blog
    PrepScholar, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-american-dream</u>](https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-american-dream)

54. The 143 Most Important Quotes in The Great Gatsby, Analyzed - Blog
    PrepScholar, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-quotes</u>](https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-quotes)

55. The Great Gatsby Themes: Morality, Money, Time, and More -
    Custom-Writing.org, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://custom-writing.org/blog/great-gatsby-themes</u>](https://custom-writing.org/blog/great-gatsby-themes)

56. The Great Gatsby: Key Quotes with page numbers Flashcards - Quizlet,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://quizlet.com/335883276/the-great-gatsby-key-quotes-with-page-numbers-flash-cards/</u>](https://quizlet.com/335883276/the-great-gatsby-key-quotes-with-page-numbers-flash-cards/)

57. The Great Gatsby Quotes and Analysis Flashcards - Quizlet,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://quizlet.com/gb/868481220/the-great-gatsby-quotes-and-analysis-flash-cards/</u>](https://quizlet.com/gb/868481220/the-great-gatsby-quotes-and-analysis-flash-cards/)

58. Great Gatsby Ch.9 Flashcards - Quizlet, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://quizlet.com/390410969/great-gatsby-ch9-flash-cards/</u>](https://quizlet.com/390410969/great-gatsby-ch9-flash-cards/)

59. Existentialism In The Great Gatsby - 802 Words \| Cram, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cram.com/essay/Existentialism-In-The-Great-Gatsby/PJSX9D44RV</u>](https://www.cram.com/essay/Existentialism-In-The-Great-Gatsby/PJSX9D44RV)

60. SELF-DETERMINATION OF GATSBY'S CHARACTER IN FS FITZGERALD'S THE
    GREAT GATSBY Ines Indira Prameswari - E-Journal Unesa, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ejournal.unesa.ac.id/index.php/litera-kultura/article/download/9034/9013/</u>](https://ejournal.unesa.ac.id/index.php/litera-kultura/article/download/9034/9013/)

61. The Interpretation of The Great Gatsby from the Perspective of
    Existentialism - Atlantis Press, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.atlantis-press.com/proceedings/icmess-18/25897297</u>](https://www.atlantis-press.com/proceedings/icmess-18/25897297)

62. The Female Other: Feminist Existentialism and Crisis in The Great
    Gatsby - Digital Commons@Lindenwood University, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://digitalcommons.lindenwood.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1014&context=src_2023</u>](https://digitalcommons.lindenwood.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1014&context=src_2023)

63. Analysis of The Great Gatsby from the ... - Semantic Scholar,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/b694/97ec79cdc4b5034aaf0fb009a3f9939664f3.pdf</u>](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/b694/97ec79cdc4b5034aaf0fb009a3f9939664f3.pdf)

64. Religious Language and Symbolism in The Great Gatsby's Valley of
    Ashes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.southampton.k12.va.us/cms/lib/VA02208188/Centricity/Domain/433/Religious_Language_and_Symbolism_in_Valley_of_Ashes.pdf</u>](https://www.southampton.k12.va.us/cms/lib/VA02208188/Centricity/Domain/433/Religious_Language_and_Symbolism_in_Valley_of_Ashes.pdf)

65. Selected cultural elements and allusions in five Polish translations
    of F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://czasopisma.bg.ug.edu.pl/index.php/beyond/article/download/10403/9382/14693</u>](https://czasopisma.bg.ug.edu.pl/index.php/beyond/article/download/10403/9382/14693)

66. F. Scott Fitzgerald Papers, 1897-1944 - Finding Aids, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://findingaids.princeton.edu/catalog/C0187</u>](https://findingaids.princeton.edu/catalog/C0187)

67. Selected cultural elements and allusions in five Polish translations
    of ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://czasopisma.bg.ug.edu.pl/index.php/beyond/article/view/10403</u>](https://czasopisma.bg.ug.edu.pl/index.php/beyond/article/view/10403)

68. Full article: A beautiful little fool? Retranslating Daisy Buchanan
    in The Great Gatsby, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0907676X.2020.1778047</u>](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0907676X.2020.1778047)

69. Novelist Haruki Murakami explains why The Great Gatsby is so great
    \| Silver Birch Press, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://silverbirchpress.wordpress.com/2014/03/18/novelist-haruki-murakami-explains-why-the-great-gatsby-is-so-great/</u>](https://silverbirchpress.wordpress.com/2014/03/18/novelist-haruki-murakami-explains-why-the-great-gatsby-is-so-great/)

70. The Great Gatsby: Translating An American Classic \| Language
    Insight, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://languageinsight.com/blog/2019/the-great-gatsby-translating-an-american-classic/</u>](https://languageinsight.com/blog/2019/the-great-gatsby-translating-an-american-classic/)

71. Gatsby in Translationland: A Polish “Gatsby” in the 21st Century
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.asymptotejournal.com/blog/2014/04/10/gatsby-in-translationland-a-polish-gatsby-in-the-21st-century/</u>](https://www.asymptotejournal.com/blog/2014/04/10/gatsby-in-translationland-a-polish-gatsby-in-the-21st-century/)

72. LA LITTÉRATURE (RÉ)CONFORTANTE - MatheO, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://matheo.uliege.be/bitstream/2268.2/19016/1/ROGLIC%20Jeanne%20s174696.pdf</u>](https://matheo.uliege.be/bitstream/2268.2/19016/1/ROGLIC%20Jeanne%20s174696.pdf)

73. Zwischen Oberflächlichkeit und Seelentiefe - Joséphine Nicolas macht
    Zelda Fitzgerald in ihrem Roman „Tage mit Gatsby“ zur Ich-Erzählerin
    : literaturkritik.de, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://literaturkritik.de/nicolas-tage-mit-gatsby,28024.html</u>](https://literaturkritik.de/nicolas-tage-mit-gatsby,28024.html)

74. Littérature \| Ephémérides \| Passion Lettres Deux, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sculfort.fr/pl2/ephemerides_files/category-litt00e9rature.php</u>](https://www.sculfort.fr/pl2/ephemerides_files/category-litt00e9rature.php)

75. American Dreaming: Really Reading The Great Gatsby - PMC - PubMed
    Central, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7467143/</u>](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7467143/)

76. 5 Historically Banned Classics and Why - Canterbury Classics,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.canterburyclassicsbooks.com/blog/2023/10/02/5-historically-banned-classics-and-why/</u>](https://www.canterburyclassicsbooks.com/blog/2023/10/02/5-historically-banned-classics-and-why/)

77. Banned Books Awareness: “The Great Gatsby”, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://bbark.deepforestproductions.com/column/2012/11/25/banned-books-awareness-the-great-gatsby/</u>](https://bbark.deepforestproductions.com/column/2012/11/25/banned-books-awareness-the-great-gatsby/)

78. Six Classic Novels Censored in the United States - Books Tell You
    Why, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blog.bookstellyouwhy.com/bid/230200/celebrate-banned-books-week-2011</u>](https://blog.bookstellyouwhy.com/bid/230200/celebrate-banned-books-week-2011)

79. Banned Books \| Penguin Random House, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/banned-books/</u>](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/banned-books/)

80. Adaptations of The Great Gatsby - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_The_Great_Gatsby</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_The_Great_Gatsby)

81. 'The Great Gatsby' Movie Adaptations - ThoughtCo, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.thoughtco.com/the-great-gatsby-movie-adaptations-739956</u>](https://www.thoughtco.com/the-great-gatsby-movie-adaptations-739956)

82. Every Great Gatsby Movie, Compared: 2013, 1974, 1949 ..., otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-movies</u>](https://blog.prepscholar.com/the-great-gatsby-movies)

83. GATSBY FEVER: The Great Gatsby in Comics - Comics Grinder,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://comicsgrinder.com/2024/01/17/gatsby-fever-the-great-gatsby-in-comics/</u>](https://comicsgrinder.com/2024/01/17/gatsby-fever-the-great-gatsby-in-comics/)

84. The Great Gatsby by F Scott Fitzgerald, K Woodman-Maynard \| The
    Center for Fiction, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bookstore.centerforfiction.org/item/fDcyhWd7_ahCmU6wI6sZgQ/lists/Lip14jetsg2A/</u>](https://bookstore.centerforfiction.org/item/fDcyhWd7_ahCmU6wI6sZgQ/lists/Lip14jetsg2A/)

85. The Great Gatsby: A Graphic Novel Adaptation by K. Woodman-Maynard -
    Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/53484679-the-great-gatsby</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/53484679-the-great-gatsby)

86. The Great Gatsby (musical) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Great_Gatsby\_(musical)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Great_Gatsby_(musical))

87. Gatsby Digital Program \| A.R.T. - American Repertory Theater,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://americanrepertorytheater.org/gatsby-digital-program/</u>](https://americanrepertorytheater.org/gatsby-digital-program/)

88. All of 2022's New Audio Drama, Audio Book and Actual Play Podcasts,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.thecambridgegeek.com/posts/2022/12/20221231-a.php</u>](https://www.thecambridgegeek.com/posts/2022/12/20221231-a.php)

89. 128\. The Great Gatsby - Adapt or Perish, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.adaptorperishcast.com/podcast/2023/7/4/128-the-great-gatsby</u>](https://www.adaptorperishcast.com/podcast/2023/7/4/128-the-great-gatsby)

90. The Great Gatsby, by F. Scott Fitzgerald - The Classic Tales
    Podcast, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://classictalesaudiobooks.com/classic-tales-titles/the-great-gatsby-by-f-scott-fitzgerald-a-special-podcast-miniseries/</u>](https://classictalesaudiobooks.com/classic-tales-titles/the-great-gatsby-by-f-scott-fitzgerald-a-special-podcast-miniseries/)

91. Memes and More: Leveraging Social Media in the Social Studies
    Classroom, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.socialstudies.com/blog/memes-and-more-leveraging-social-media-in-the-social-studies-classroom/</u>](https://www.socialstudies.com/blog/memes-and-more-leveraging-social-media-in-the-social-studies-classroom/)

92. How is Gatsby still going? : r/Broadway - Reddit, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/Broadway/comments/1lhttks/how_is_gatsby_still_going/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/Broadway/comments/1lhttks/how_is_gatsby_still_going/)

93. Money, Money, Money Might Not Be as Funny! The Fascist Potential of
    the “Old Money” Trend on Social Media: How the Modern
    Aestheticization of Neoliberalism Connects to Right-Wing Extremist
    Narratives - ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/393473575_Money_Money_Money_Might_Not_Be_as_Funny_The_Fascist_Potential_of_the_Old_Money_Trend_on_Social_Media_How_the_Modern_Aestheticization_of_Neoliberalism_Connects_to_Right-Wing_Extremist_Narratives</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/393473575_Money_Money_Money_Might_Not_Be_as_Funny_The_Fascist_Potential_of_the_Old_Money_Trend_on_Social_Media_How_the_Modern_Aestheticization_of_Neoliberalism_Connects_to_Right-Wing_Extremist_Narratives)

94. The Great Gatsby: A Queer Analysis - The Paw Print, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://cnhspawprint.com/3448/uncategorized/the-great-gatsby-a-queer-analysis/</u>](https://cnhspawprint.com/3448/uncategorized/the-great-gatsby-a-queer-analysis/)

95. We Need to Talk About Nick: - DiVA portal, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1070602/FULLTEXT01.pdf</u>](http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1070602/FULLTEXT01.pdf)

96. Homosexuality in The Great Gatsby? : r/TheGreatGatsby - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/TheGreatGatsby/comments/1htnwsm/homosexuality_in_the_great_gatsby/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/TheGreatGatsby/comments/1htnwsm/homosexuality_in_the_great_gatsby/)

97. Nick Carraway in the Closet - P3-USAL, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://p3.usal.edu.ar/index.php/ideassup/article/download/5620/7672/20960</u>](http://p3.usal.edu.ar/index.php/ideassup/article/download/5620/7672/20960)

98. Queer Asian Reads: Why I struggled with Nghi Vo's reimagining of The
    Great Gatsby, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://tsl.news/nghi-vo-books/</u>](https://tsl.news/nghi-vo-books/)

99. Jay Gatsby/Nick Carraway - Fanlore, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://fanlore.org/wiki/Jay_Gatsby/Nick_Carraway</u>](https://fanlore.org/wiki/Jay_Gatsby/Nick_Carraway)

100. irisbleufic - Fanlore, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://fanlore.org/wiki/Irisbleufic</u>](https://fanlore.org/wiki/Irisbleufic)

101. Fire and Freshness: A Matter of Style in The Great Gatsby, by
     George Garrett., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://fitzgerald.narod.ru/critics-eng/garrett-firefresh.html</u>](https://fitzgerald.narod.ru/critics-eng/garrett-firefresh.html)

102. english.binus.ac.id, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://english.binus.ac.id/2024/03/29/the-great-gatsby-unveiling-the-intricacies-of-popularity/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CThe%20Great%20Gatsby%E2%80%9D%20has%20had,fashion%20collections%20over%20the%20years.</u>](https://english.binus.ac.id/2024/03/29/the-great-gatsby-unveiling-the-intricacies-of-popularity/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CThe%20Great%20Gatsby%E2%80%9D%20has%20had,fashion%20collections%20over%20the%20years.)

103. The Lasting Influence of “The Great Gatsby” on Fashion, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://finearts.tcu.edu/news/the-lasting-influence-of-the-great-gatsby-on-fashion/</u>](https://finearts.tcu.edu/news/the-lasting-influence-of-the-great-gatsby-on-fashion/)

104. Blog 11: TGG Influence on Fashion - Create OU Sites, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://sites.create.ou.edu/isle/2025/05/08/blog-11-tgg-influence-on-fashion/</u>](https://sites.create.ou.edu/isle/2025/05/08/blog-11-tgg-influence-on-fashion/)

105. Wielki Gatsby - F. Scott Fitzgerald \| Książka w Lubimyczytac.pl -
     Opinie, oceny, ceny, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5128183/wielki-gatsby</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5128183/wielki-gatsby)

106. Wielki Gatsby, 2022 (książka) - Profinfo.pl, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.profinfo.pl/sklep/wielki-gatsby,280759.html</u>](https://www.profinfo.pl/sklep/wielki-gatsby,280759.html)

107. Wydawnictwo SBM - BIBLIO ebookpoint - Helion, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://virtual107.helion.pl/wydawca/16/0/27/wydawnictwo-sbm</u>](https://virtual107.helion.pl/wydawca/16/0/27/wydawnictwo-sbm)

108. biblioteka 2023/2024 - GPE, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://zso1.edu.gdansk.pl/pl/getfile/49661/77110/Prezentacja%20Biblioteka%202023-2024.pdf</u>](https://zso1.edu.gdansk.pl/pl/getfile/49661/77110/Prezentacja%20Biblioteka%202023-2024.pdf)

109. Książki po angielsku dla początkujących — co wybrać - SpeakPro
     Academy, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.speakpro.pl/ksiazki-po-angielsku-dla-poczatkujacych-co-wybrac/</u>](https://www.speakpro.pl/ksiazki-po-angielsku-dla-poczatkujacych-co-wybrac/)

110. The Great Gatsby. Wielki Gatsby w wersji do nauki angielskiego wyd.
     2023 \| Jemielniak Dariusz (Książka) - Księgarnia znak.com.pl,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.znak.com.pl/p/the-great-gatsby-wielki-gatsby-w-wersji-do-nauki-angielskiego-wyd-2023-jemielniak-dariusz-210571</u>](https://www.znak.com.pl/p/the-great-gatsby-wielki-gatsby-w-wersji-do-nauki-angielskiego-wyd-2023-jemielniak-dariusz-210571)

111. The Great Gatsby w wersji do nauki angielskieg \| F.Scott
     Fitzgerald (Książka) - Księgarnia znak.com.pl, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.znak.com.pl/p/the-great-gatsby-w-wersji-do-nauki-angielskieg-f-scott-fitzgerald-129230</u>](https://www.znak.com.pl/p/the-great-gatsby-w-wersji-do-nauki-angielskieg-f-scott-fitzgerald-129230)

112. Najlepsze filmy do matury - WP Film, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://film.wp.pl/najlepsze-filmy-do-matury-6310035117312129g</u>](https://film.wp.pl/najlepsze-filmy-do-matury-6310035117312129g)

113. "Wielki Gatsby" - trudna kariera dobrej książki - Dwójka - Polskie
     Radio, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.polskieradio.pl/8/2827/artykul/863633,wielki-gatsby-trudna-kariera-dobrej-ksiazki</u>](https://www.polskieradio.pl/8/2827/artykul/863633,wielki-gatsby-trudna-kariera-dobrej-ksiazki)

114. The Great Gatsby, dir. Michał Zadara \| Theatre \| Biweekly,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.biweekly.pl/article/2419-the-great-gatsbydir-michal-zadara.html</u>](https://www.biweekly.pl/article/2419-the-great-gatsbydir-michal-zadara.html)

115. Lata 20. i moda męska, czyli Wielki Gatsby na imprezie\| blog
     lancerto.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.lancerto.com/pl/blog/impreza-w-stylu-lat-20</u>](https://www.lancerto.com/pl/blog/impreza-w-stylu-lat-20)

116. Bal Karnawałowy - Wielki Gatsby! \| Talaria Resort&SPA, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.talaria.pl/wydarzenia/bal-karnawalowy-wielki-gatsby</u>](https://www.talaria.pl/wydarzenia/bal-karnawalowy-wielki-gatsby)

117. Imprezy integracyjne \| Hotel Arłamów, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.arlamow.pl/eventy-w-gorach</u>](https://www.arlamow.pl/eventy-w-gorach)

118. The Great Gatsby- Polish Release - Authentic Vintage Posters,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.authenticvintageposters.com/products/great-gatsby</u>](https://www.authenticvintageposters.com/products/great-gatsby)

119. F. Scott Fitzgerald's Ledger, 1919–1938: University of South
     Carolina Transcription, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://digital.library.sc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Fitzgerald_Ledger\_-\_USC_Transcription_2013.pdf</u>](https://digital.library.sc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Fitzgerald_Ledger_-_USC_Transcription_2013.pdf)

120. Matthew J. & Arlyn Bruccoli Collection of F. Scott Fitzgerald's
     Ledger, 1919-1938, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://digital.library.sc.edu/collections/f-scott-fitzgeralds-ledger-1919-1938/</u>](https://digital.library.sc.edu/collections/f-scott-fitzgeralds-ledger-1919-1938/)

121. "Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby: Critical reception and visual
     int" by Ahmed Maklad - AUC Knowledge Fountain - The American
     University in Cairo, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://fount.aucegypt.edu/etds/47/</u>](https://fount.aucegypt.edu/etds/47/)

122. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby: Critical reception and visual
     interpretation - AUC Knowledge Fountain - The American University
     in Cairo, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://fount.aucegypt.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1046&context=etds</u>](https://fount.aucegypt.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1046&context=etds)

123. Characterizing Daisy Buchanan in Retranslations of The Great
     Gatsby: Translator Behavior and Reader Reception - Scholarly
     Publications Leiden University, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://scholarlypublications.universiteitleiden.nl/access/item%3A3505513/view</u>](https://scholarlypublications.universiteitleiden.nl/access/item%3A3505513/view)

124. Gatsby, still great at 100 - Engelsberg ideas, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://engelsbergideas.com/notebook/gatsby-still-great-at-100/</u>](https://engelsbergideas.com/notebook/gatsby-still-great-at-100/)
