# Anna Karenina: A Global Portrait

Original Title: Анна Каренина (Russian)

Author: Leo Tolstoy

Original Publication: 1875–1877 (serial), 1878 (book)

Original Publisher: The Russian Messenger (Русский вестник)

## Part I: The World of the Novel

### Why Should You Care? An Introduction for the 21st-Century Reader

At first glance, a thousand-page novel about 19th-century Russian
aristocrats might seem like a relic from a distant world, filled with
formal balls, elaborate country estates, and social rules that feel
utterly alien.<sup>1</sup> Yet, Leo Tolstoy's

*Anna Karenina* endures not as a historical artifact, but as a
profoundly modern and deeply human story that grapples with questions we
still ask ourselves today.<sup>3</sup> It is a book about the desperate,
often destructive, search for a meaningful life in a world that seems
determined to prevent it.

The novel's power lies in its universal themes. It is a sweeping
exploration of love in all its forms—passionate, forbidden, familial,
and spiritual—and the devastating consequences when those loves clash
with societal expectations.<sup>5</sup> It examines gender inequality,
the hypocrisy of social norms, the complexities of family dynamics, and
the quiet agony of mental health struggles in a way that feels
startlingly contemporary.<sup>6</sup> The characters are not simple
heroes or villains; they are intensely realistic, flawed, and
multi-dimensional people whose motivations and emotions are rendered
with such psychological precision that readers continue to see
themselves in their choices and their pain.<sup>3</sup>

The central conflict—the battle between the desire for personal
happiness and the rigid demands of society—is a timeless
dilemma.<sup>3</sup> The 19th-century aristocratic society depicted in
the novel required its members to perform their social roles perfectly,
creating a suffocating pressure to maintain appearances.<sup>2</sup>
This mirrors the modern pressure, especially for young people, to curate
a flawless online persona on platforms like Instagram and TikTok. The
gap between a polished public image and a messy private reality can
create a profound sense of inauthenticity—a feeling that drives many of
the novel's characters to their breaking points. Anna's story, in this
light, is more than a tale of adultery; it is a tragic exploration of
the psychological cost of living an inauthentic life and the universal
human search for a world where our inner self can align with our outer
existence. This is why

*Anna Karenina* still matters: it holds up a mirror to our own lives,
forcing us to confront the same essential questions about love,
identity, and what it truly means to be happy.

### Genesis of a Masterpiece: From "Pitiable Woman" to Epic Novel

*Anna Karenina* did not spring fully formed from Tolstoy's mind. Its
creation was a long, arduous, and deeply personal process that spanned
four years, from 1873 to 1877, marked by constant rewriting, shifting
ideas, and the profound influence of real-world events.<sup>11</sup>

#### The Spark of an Idea

The novel's origins can be traced to 1870, when Tolstoy confided in his
wife, Sophia, that he had conceived of a "type of a married woman from
high society who had lost her way".<sup>11</sup> His stated goal was to
portray this character as "pitiable, not guilty," a sympathetic figure
rather than a simple sinner.<sup>11</sup> This initial seed of an idea
lay dormant until March 1873, when Tolstoy, by chance, picked up a
volume of unfinished stories by Russia's great national poet, Alexander
Pushkin.<sup>11</sup> A fragment titled

*Guests Were Gathering at the Dacha* immediately captured his
imagination with its direct, unadorned opening.<sup>11</sup> Inspired,
Tolstoy began to write, and as he explained in a letter, "suddenly it
all came together so beautifully and tightly that it turned into a
novel".<sup>11</sup>

#### Real-Life Tragedies and Inspirations

The character of Anna herself was a composite of real women who had
captured Tolstoy's attention. Her physical appearance, especially her
striking dark hair, was inspired by Maria Gartung, Pushkin's eldest
daughter, a woman whose beauty and grace made a great impression on
Tolstoy when he met her at a ball.<sup>11</sup>

A far more tragic and direct influence shaped the novel's devastating
climax. In January 1872, a woman named Anna Stepanova Pirogova, the
mistress of one of Tolstoy's landowning neighbors, threw herself under a
freight train after being rejected by her lover.<sup>11</sup> The event
occurred at the Yasenki railway station near Tolstoy's estate. Tolstoy
was so deeply affected that he went to the station to personally observe
the autopsy of her mangled body.<sup>12</sup> His wife later wrote that
he was "terribly shaken" by the sight.<sup>12</sup> This real-life
tragedy provided the grim, unforgettable method of Anna Karenina's own
suicide, a detail that was absent in early drafts, which had her body
being found in the Neva River.<sup>11</sup>

#### The Four-Year Struggle

What began as a plan for a short, cautionary tale about adultery soon
spiraled into a monumental epic.<sup>11</sup> Tolstoy spent the next
four years in a state of constant creative struggle, rewriting the novel
numerous times.<sup>11</sup> His frustration is palpable in an 1876
letter to his cousin, where he famously complained, "My Anna has become
as tiresome to me as a bitter radish... I fuss over her like a pupil
who’s turned out badly".<sup>11</sup> This period of intense labor saw
the novel's characters and themes evolve dramatically. Anna transformed
from a merely "pitiful" woman into a figure of immense moral and
spiritual stature, while her husband, Karenin, devolved from a kind but
eccentric man into the "pedantic, self-important, and emotionally cold
bureaucrat" of the final version.<sup>11</sup>

#### Mind-Blown Moment: Debunking the "First Line" Myth

A persistent legend, first published in an 1898 book by Pyotr
Sergeyenko, a friend of the Tolstoy family, claimed that the novel began
with the sentence, "Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys'
house".<sup>11</sup> According to this myth, Tolstoy later added the
now-iconic opening line—"All happy families are alike; each unhappy
family is unhappy in its own way"—as a philosophical
flourish.<sup>11</sup> This story was accepted as fact for decades.
However, in the 1930s, literary scholar Nikolai Gudziy gained access to
Tolstoy's original manuscripts and made a startling discovery. The
earliest drafts of the novel did not begin with the Oblonsky family at
all. Instead, they opened with a high-society salon scene that now
appears in the second part of the book.<sup>11</sup> The famous
"everything was in confusion" line, far from being the novel's starting
point, did not appear until the ninth draft of the
manuscript.<sup>11</sup>

This evolution of the novel's structure reveals a deeper truth about its
creation. The initial concept was a straightforward story about an
adulterous woman.<sup>11</sup> The four-year writing process, however,
coincided with Tolstoy's own deepening spiritual crisis and his growing
disillusionment with the superficiality of aristocratic
society.<sup>13</sup> The most significant change during this period was
the introduction of the entire parallel storyline of Konstantin Levin, a
character who was completely absent from early drafts.<sup>11</sup>
Tolstoy essentially split his novel in two. He used Anna's tragic story
to dissect and critique the moral decay of the society he knew, while
simultaneously using Levin's journey—a deeply personal and
autobiographical narrative—to actively search for answers in faith,
family, and a connection to the Russian land. The novel's creation,
therefore, is not just a literary feat; it is a documented record of
Tolstoy's personal struggle to find meaning in a changing world, making

*Anna Karenina* one of the most profound and intimate works of fiction
ever written.

### Russia in Transition: The Historical Crucible of Anna Karenina

*Anna Karenina* is more than a timeless story; it is a rich and detailed
cultural document, a snapshot of the Russian Empire at a pivotal and
turbulent moment in its history.<sup>1</sup> The novel is set in the
1870s, a period of immense social, political, and technological change
following the "Great Reforms" initiated by Tsar Alexander II in the
1860s.<sup>1</sup>

#### The Post-Reform Era

The most significant of these reforms was the emancipation of the serfs
in 1861, which abolished a centuries-old system of feudal
bondage.<sup>1</sup> This monumental change sent shockwaves through
Russian society, creating a new class of hired peasant laborers and
accelerating the decline of the landowning gentry.<sup>1</sup> This
tension is a central theme of the novel, vividly portrayed through
Konstantin Levin's struggles to manage his country estate. He attempts
to introduce modern, Western agricultural techniques, but his peasants,
rooted in tradition, resist these innovations, highlighting the deep
cultural and economic friction of the era.<sup>1</sup>

#### Modernization and Its Symbols

The era was marked by a rapid push toward industrialization, symbolized
most powerfully in the novel by the railway.<sup>1</sup> The
construction of train lines crisscrossing the vast Russian landscape
represented progress and modernity, but for Tolstoy, it also embodied an
impersonal, destructive force that threatened the traditional, rural way
of life.<sup>20</sup> This period also saw the expansion of the daily
press and the rise of radical political movements, as educated youth
began to challenge the autocratic tsarist regime.<sup>1</sup> These
contemporary developments are woven into the fabric of the novel, from
debates about local elections (

*zemstvo*) to references to the "Slavic question"—the pan-Slavic
movement that led to the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78, a topic so
controversial that the novel's original publisher refused to print the
final part.<sup>11</sup>

#### The Clash of Ideologies

At the heart of this societal transformation was a profound ideological
battle. On one side were the "Westernizers," members of the elite who
believed Russia's future lay in adopting the liberal, rationalist, and
democratic values of Western Europe.<sup>2</sup> This is reflected in
the high society of St. Petersburg and Moscow, where aristocrats spoke
French, followed European fashions, and engaged in intellectual debates
based on Western philosophy.<sup>23</sup> On the other side were the
"Slavophiles," who argued that Russia should reject modernization and
cherish its unique, traditional Slavic culture, rooted in the Orthodox
faith and the peasant community.<sup>13</sup> This conflict is perfectly
embodied in the novel's structure: Anna's world is that of the
Europeanized, artificial high society, while Levin's journey is a
conscious rejection of that world in search of an authentic Russian
identity in the countryside.<sup>13</sup>

#### The "Woman Question"

The novel also serves as a crucial document of the 19th-century debate
on women's rights, known as the "woman question".<sup>14</sup> While
characters at dinner parties discuss new ideas about female education
and independence, the reality for women in the novel is
grim.<sup>19</sup> They were largely confined to domestic roles as wives
and mothers, with their social status and survival dependent on making a
"good" marriage.<sup>17</sup> The tragic fates of both the rebellious
Anna, who is destroyed by a society that will not forgive her for
seeking personal freedom, and the dutiful Dolly, who endures a life of
quiet misery with her philandering husband, powerfully illustrate the
severe limitations and profound injustices faced by women in this
patriarchal world.<sup>17</sup>

## Part II: Deconstructing the Narrative

### The Language of Symbols: Trains, Horses, and Haunting Dreams

Tolstoy masterfully embeds the novel's central themes within a rich
tapestry of recurring symbols. These are not mere literary decorations;
they are narrative engines that drive the plot, reveal the characters'
subconscious minds, and offer a powerful commentary on the collision
between human passion and the forces of a changing world.

#### The Train: Engine of Modernity and Fate

The train is the novel's most pervasive and ominous symbol.<sup>20</sup>
It represents the relentless, impersonal, and destructive power of
modernity and industrialization that Tolstoy saw encroaching upon
traditional Russian life.<sup>21</sup> The entire arc of Anna and
Vronsky's ill-fated relationship is framed by the railway. Their first
meeting at the Moscow station is immediately marked by a horrific omen:
a railway worker is accidentally crushed to death by a
train.<sup>29</sup> Anna prophetically remarks, "It's a bad omen,"
sealing the connection between her love and the violent, mechanical
force of the train.<sup>32</sup> From that moment, the railway becomes a
recurring motif, a space of fateful encounters and growing dread.
Ultimately, in a moment of perfect, tragic symmetry, Anna's life ends at
a railway station, as she throws herself under the wheels of a freight
train, destroyed by the very force that heralded the beginning of her
passion.<sup>30</sup> The train thus symbolizes an unstoppable fate, a
modern, industrial power that is indifferent to human life and
ultimately crushes the individual spirit.

#### Vronsky's Horse, Frou-Frou: A Tragic Parallel

If the train symbolizes Anna's fate, Vronsky's beloved racehorse,
Frou-Frou, is a direct and heartbreaking symbol of Anna
herself.<sup>33</sup> Frou-Frou is described as a beautiful, spirited,
and highly sensitive creature, much like Anna.<sup>34</sup> Vronsky's
relationship with the horse is filled with a passion and affection that
mirrors his feelings for his lover.<sup>35</sup> The symbolic connection
culminates in the disastrous officers' steeplechase. Distracted and
unsettled after a conversation with Anna, Vronsky makes a clumsy,
"unpardonable mistake" during a jump; his awkward movement breaks the
mare's back, and she must be shot.<sup>35</sup>

This scene is a powerful allegory for Vronsky's relationship with Anna.
In both cases, he is the rider, the one in control, who loves a
beautiful and vulnerable being but whose carelessness and selfish
passion ultimately lead to her destruction.<sup>33</sup> The power
dynamic of 19th-century society is laid bare: for Vronsky, the race is a
dangerous amusement, but for both the horse and the woman, the stakes
are life and death.<sup>33</sup> Frou-Frou's needless death is a direct
foreshadowing of Anna's own tragic end, a "needless result of someone
else's mistake".<sup>33</sup> Vronsky later recalls the moment of
Frou-Frou's fall as the "darkest moment of his life," a memory that
underscores the tragic parallel between the two beings he loved and
destroyed.<sup>37</sup>

#### The Recurring Peasant (Muzhik): A Dream of Guilt and Doom

A strange and terrifying figure of a disheveled peasant, or *muzhik*,
haunts the novel, acting as a messenger from the
subconscious.<sup>32</sup> He first appears as the railway guard killed
at the station, linking him from the start with death and
fate.<sup>32</sup> He then resurfaces in a shared, recurring nightmare
experienced by both Anna and Vronsky.<sup>32</sup> In their dreams, the
peasant is a "little, dirty" man with a "disheveled beard," rummaging in
a sack and muttering incomprehensible words in French while working over
a piece of iron.<sup>32</sup> This dream figure is a dense,
multi-layered symbol that synthesizes the novel's core conflicts.

- **The Peasant**: He represents the authentic, rural soul of Russia—the
  world Levin seeks and the aristocracy has forgotten.<sup>19</sup> He
  is the repressed, earthy reality of the nation.

- **Muttering in French**: French is the language of the aristocracy's
  artificial, Europeanized performance.<sup>23</sup> A peasant speaking
  French is a grotesque, unnatural image, symbolizing the corruption of
  Russia's true identity by a hollow, imported culture.

- **Working on Iron**: The iron links directly to the railway—the symbol
  of destructive modernity.<sup>32</sup>

The dream thus becomes a horrifying vision where the soul of Russia is
forced to participate in its own destruction, mirroring how Anna's
authentic passions are twisted and ultimately destroyed by the
artificial rules of her society. The peasant represents the guilt, doom,
and violent, primal force that lies just beneath the polished surface of
Anna and Vronsky's "civilized" affair.<sup>39</sup>

#### Lost in Translation: The Challenge of Tolstoy's Tone

Translating *Anna Karenina* presents immense challenges that go beyond
mere words. One of the most significant difficulties is capturing
Tolstoy's unique narrative tone, which can shift in a single paragraph
from profound sincerity to biting, "condescending sarcasm".<sup>42</sup>
Early and influential translators, such as Constance Garnett, have been
criticized for smoothing over these tonal shifts, which flattens the
novel's psychological complexity and social critique.<sup>42</sup> A
Reddit user analyzing Garnett's translation points out how she
transforms an ironic, awkward interaction into a flat, nonsensical
statement, effectively turning Tolstoy's sharp portrayal into a "cheesy
Victorian romance novel".<sup>42</sup>

Other untranslatable elements are deeply embedded in Russian culture and
language. Translators must decide whether to keep Russian-specific terms
like *versty* (a unit of distance) and *pudy* (a unit of weight) to
preserve the "Russian flavour," or to convert them to modern equivalents
for reader accessibility.<sup>43</sup> Furthermore, the subtle but
crucial distinctions in the Russian use of the formal "you" (

*vy*) and the informal "you" (*ty*) are difficult to convey in English.
Tolstoy uses these shifts to meticulously chart the progression of
intimacy and distance in relationships, a nuance that is often lost in
translation.<sup>23</sup>

### Two Lives, One Novel: The Parallel Journeys of Anna and Levin

*Anna Karenina* is famous for its dual-plot structure, which follows two
distinct yet interconnected storylines. These are not separate
narratives but a deliberate and profound dialogue, offering two
contrasting responses to the central question of the novel: how does one
live a good and meaningful life?

#### Anna's Tragedy: A Psychological Deep Dive

Anna's story is a brilliant and harrowing psychological portrait of a
woman's descent. Trapped in a passionless, "empty" marriage to Alexei
Karenin—a man she comes to see as an emotionless government
machine—Anna's affair with the dashing Count Vronsky is a desperate
grasp for love, passion, and an authentic life.<sup>44</sup> However,
her rebellion against the hypocritical conventions of her society comes
at a terrible price. She is forced to abandon her beloved son, Seryozha,
and becomes a social pariah, ostracized by the very people who tolerate
adultery in men as a matter of course.<sup>28</sup>

This relentless social pressure and isolation fuel a devastating
internal decline. Anna becomes consumed by jealousy, paranoia, and a
growing dependence on morphine.<sup>8</sup> Her love for Vronsky, once a
source of liberation, becomes a prison of obsessive
anxiety.<sup>44</sup>

Some modern critical analyses have retrospectively applied a
psychological lens to Anna's behavior, suggesting that her symptoms
align with a diagnosis of Borderline Personality Disorder
(BPD).<sup>7</sup> This interpretation points to several key patterns
described in the novel:

- **Instability in Mood and Behavior**: Anna experiences rapid, extreme
  mood swings, shifting from intense love to cold irritability in
  moments.<sup>7</sup>

- **Fear of Abandonment**: She develops a near-paranoid fear that
  Vronsky will leave her, misinterpreting his actions as signs of
  rejection.<sup>7</sup>

- **Unstable Interpersonal Relationships**: Her feelings for those
  closest to her, including her husband and son, oscillate wildly
  between idealization and contempt.<sup>7</sup>

This modern framework provides a way to understand Anna's tragic end not
simply as a moral failing punished by fate, but as a severe mental
health crisis, exacerbated by an unforgiving society, that culminates in
her suicide.<sup>7</sup>

#### Levin's Quest: Tolstoy's Search for Meaning

Running parallel to Anna's story is the journey of Konstantin Levin, a
wealthy landowner who is widely recognized as Tolstoy's most direct
autobiographical character.<sup>12</sup> Levin represents the novel's
philosophical core. He is socially awkward, deeply uncomfortable with
the artifice and hypocrisy of high society, and yearns for an authentic,
meaningful existence.<sup>13</sup> He seeks this meaning not in the
salons of Moscow, but in the rhythms of country life, in physical labor
alongside his peasants, and in the creation of a family with
Kitty.<sup>13</sup>

#### Philosophical Crossroads: Faith vs. Reason

Levin's journey is fundamentally a spiritual one, defined by his
struggle with existential doubt.<sup>48</sup> As a rational, educated
man, he initially seeks answers to life's biggest questions—the meaning
of life, the reality of death—in the works of philosophers and
theologians, but finds only intellectual dead ends and
despair.<sup>49</sup>

His profound spiritual epiphany comes not from a book, but from a simple
conversation with a peasant named Fyodor. The peasant explains that a
righteous man is one who "lives for his soul" and "does not forget
God".<sup>49</sup> This simple, un-theological statement strikes Levin
with the force of revelation. He realizes that the meaning of life and
the knowledge of good are not things that can be arrived at through
logic or reason.<sup>50</sup> In fact, he concludes that faith is, by
its very nature, "unreasonable" and that goodness exists "outside the
chain of cause and effect".<sup>50</sup> This marks the novel's ultimate
philosophical conclusion: a rejection of the cold rationalism of Western
thought in favor of an intuitive, spiritual faith rooted in the heart
and the simple truths of Russian life.<sup>51</sup> While Anna's pursuit
of personal desire leads to destruction, Levin's surrender to a purpose
beyond himself leads to a state of grace and a reason to live.

## Part III: Anna Karenina Across Borders: A Global Reception History

From its first serialized publication in *The Russian Messenger*, *Anna
Karenina* quickly transcended its national origins, embarking on a
global journey of translation, adaptation, and reinterpretation that
continues to this day.<sup>53</sup> The novel's reception in different
cultures reveals as much about those cultures as it does about Tolstoy's
work, highlighting which themes resonated universally and which were
filtered through a specific national lens.

### Initial Encounters: How the World First Read Tolstoy

The novel's initial foray into the world was largely through the medium
of French, the dominant literary language of the 19th century. This had
a profound and often distorting effect on its early reception.

- **United States**: The first complete English translation was
  published in the U.S. in 1886 to a decidedly mixed
  reception.<sup>54</sup> While American reviewers praised the novel's
  powerful themes and psychological realism, they frequently criticized
  its formidable length, with one review in the  
  *New York Tribune* stating it was "fully twice as long as \[it\]
  should have been".<sup>54</sup> There was also a debate about its
  cultural relevance; some critics found the depiction of Russian
  society unrelatable, with one review claiming it "resembles no human
  nature found out of Russia".<sup>54</sup> Others, however, argued that
  its tragedy was "universal" and could have taken place
  anywhere.<sup>54</sup> Anna's suicide was also a point of contention,
  seen by some as a shocking and unsuitable ending for young American
  readers.<sup>54</sup>

- **France**: The first French translation, which appeared in 1885,
  served as the primary source for many other European
  versions.<sup>55</sup> Unfortunately, this translation was heavily
  abridged and flawed, omitting entire sections and dulling the nuance
  of Tolstoy's prose.<sup>55</sup> The novel's extensive use of the
  French language by its aristocratic characters was a key point of
  interest for French readers, serving as a reflection of their own
  cultural influence and the "European" affectations of the Russian
  elite.<sup>23</sup>

- **Italy**: Italy's first encounter with the novel in 1885 was through
  a serialization of the flawed French translation in the newspaper
  *Gazzetta di Torino*.<sup>55</sup> Consequently, early Italian book
  editions were indirect, filled with errors, and presented Tolstoy's
  work through a French naturalist lens rather than as a uniquely
  Russian realist masterpiece.<sup>55</sup> It would take many years for
  a high-quality, direct translation to reshape his reputation among
  Italian readers.

- **Spain**: The first Spanish translation, by Enrique L. de Verneuil,
  was published in Barcelona in 1888.<sup>57</sup>

- **Germany and the United Kingdom**: In Germany, the literary scene was
  dominated by debates surrounding French naturalism, and Tolstoy's work
  was initially received within that framework.<sup>58</sup> In the
  United Kingdom, interest in Russian literature had been growing since
  the Crimean War, but it was a slow process for Russian authors to
  achieve the same level of recognition as their Western European
  counterparts.<sup>59</sup>

### The Novel in the 21st Century: Enduring Resonance

Today, *Anna Karenina* is firmly established as a global classic, with
its story continually being rediscovered and reinterpreted by new
generations of readers and artists around the world.

- **China**: The novel enjoys immense popularity in China, where it has
  a large and passionate fan base and is considered one of the most
  beloved Russian classics.<sup>60</sup> This enduring appeal culminated
  in a major, sell-out Chinese-language stage adaptation of a Russian
  musical based on the novel, which toured multiple cities to great
  acclaim in 2023.<sup>60</sup>

- **Japan**: The dramatic and emotional core of the story has translated
  powerfully into the world of dance. Several ballet productions of
  *Anna Karenina* have been staged in Japan, including a notable version
  by choreographer André Prokovsky, which was performed by the
  prestigious Japan Ballet Association.<sup>62</sup>

- **Spain**: The novel continues to inspire new artistic
  interpretations. A recent Catalan-language theatre production at the
  Teatre Nacional de Catalunya was planned for an international tour,
  demonstrating the story's continued relevance on the European
  stage.<sup>63</sup>

- **The Arab World**: While early 20th-century introductions to Tolstoy
  in the Arab world often focused more on his philosophical and
  religious ideas, *Anna Karenina* was recognized for the international
  fame it brought him.<sup>64</sup> The novel's themes of social
  alienation and the search for an authentic life resonate in
  contemporary Arabic literature. For example, in Rabih Alameddine's
  acclaimed novel  
  *An Unnecessary Woman*, the protagonist—a reclusive, intellectual
  woman in Beirut—devotes her life to translating great works of world
  literature into Arabic, and the translation she is most proud of is
  her own personal version of *Anna Karenina*.<sup>65</sup>

- **India**: The novel's core conflict of forbidden love versus social
  duty was famously and successfully adapted into the classic 1965
  Bollywood film *Guide*.<sup>66</sup> The film masterfully transposed
  Tolstoy's themes into an Indian cultural context, shifting the focus
  from a purely social tragedy to a story that also explores
  spirituality and redemption, exposing societal double standards along
  the way.<sup>66</sup>

- **Brazil and Portugal**: Early reception in Portugal was lukewarm.
  Critics in the late 19th century often found Russian novels, including
  Tolstoy's, to be too long and "disordered" compared to the more
  familiar structures of French and English literature.<sup>68</sup> The
  first full Portuguese book translation of  
  *Anna Karenina* did not appear until 1912.<sup>68</sup>

### Valuable Table: Key International Film & Television Adaptations

The novel's journey from page to screen provides a vivid timeline of its
global cultural impact. The following table highlights some of the most
significant film and television adaptations, demonstrating how different
cultures and eras have envisioned Tolstoy's iconic characters.

| Year | Title | Country of Origin | Director | Anna Karenina | Count Vronsky | Alexei Karenin |
|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| 1911 | *Anna Karenina* | France/Russia | Maurice André Maître | M. Sorochtina | Nikolai Vasilyev | N/A |
| 1927 | *Love* | USA | Edmund Goulding | Greta Garbo | John Gilbert | Brandon Hurst |
| 1935 | *Anna Karenina* | USA | Clarence Brown | Greta Garbo | Fredric March | Basil Rathbone |
| 1948 | *Anna Karenina* | UK | Julien Duvivier | Vivien Leigh | Kieron Moore | Ralph Richardson |
| 1960 | *Nahr al-Hob (River of Love)* | Egypt | Ezzel Dine Zulficar | Faten Hamama | Omar Sharif | Zaki Rostom |
| 1967 | *Anna Karenina* | Soviet Union | Alexander Zarkhi | Tatiana Samoilova | Vasily Lanovoy | Nikolai Gritsenko |
| 1977 | *Anna Karenina* (Miniseries) | UK (BBC) | Basil Coleman | Nicola Pagett | Stuart Wilson | Eric Porter |
| 1997 | *Anna Karenina* | USA/Russia | Bernard Rose | Sophie Marceau | Sean Bean | James Fox |
| 2012 | *Anna Karenina* | UK | Joe Wright | Keira Knightley | Aaron Taylor-Johnson | Jude Law |
| 2013 | *Anna KareNina* (Series) | Philippines | Gina Alajar | Krystal Reyes | Derrick Monasterio | N/A |

Sources for table data: <sup>69</sup>

This cinematic legacy demonstrates the story's remarkable adaptability.
Each version reflects the aesthetic and cultural sensibilities of its
time, from the silent era's melodrama to Hollywood's golden age glamour,
Soviet realism, and contemporary stylized interpretations. The casting
choices alone show a fascinating evolution in how the iconic trio has
been imagined by different cultures, underscoring the universal and
enduring power of Tolstoy's narrative.

## Part IV: Special Focus: The Polish Saga of Anna Karenina

The reception of a major Russian novel in Poland is never a simple
literary event; it is an act layered with centuries of complex
political, cultural, and historical meaning. The story of *Anna
Karenina* in Poland is a saga of translation, educational debate, and
artistic reinterpretation that reveals the deep and enduring connection
Polish readers have with Tolstoy's masterpiece.

### A Century of Translation: Bringing Tolstoy into Polish

The journey of *Anna Karenina* into the Polish language has been marked
by several key moments, with each new translation representing a fresh
cultural engagement with the text for a new generation.

- **The First Encounter (1898–1900)**: The novel made its official debut
  in Poland with a translation by J. Wołowski, published in installments
  between 1898 and 1900.<sup>71</sup> This appeared nearly thirty years
  after the original Russian publication, introducing Tolstoy's complex
  social world to Polish readers at the turn of the 20th
  century.<sup>73</sup>

- **The Canonical Version (1963)**: For most of the 20th century, the
  definitive Polish version was the translation by Kazimiera
  Iłłakowiczówna, a highly respected poet and translator.<sup>74</sup>
  First published in 1963, her translation became the standard text for
  generations of Polish students and general readers.<sup>75</sup> Its
  enduring quality is reflected in its high ratings on contemporary
  Polish reader websites like Lubimyczytać.pl, where it holds an average
  score of 7.8 out of 10 based on over 8,200 ratings.<sup>77</sup>

- **A Contemporary Voice (2022)**: Recognizing that translations age
  even when the original text is timeless, the publisher Świat Książki
  released a new translation by Jan Cichocki in 2022.<sup>73</sup> This
  modern rendering aims to bring Tolstoy's prose closer to the language
  of 21st-century Polish readers, ensuring the novel's continued
  vitality and accessibility.<sup>73</sup>

#### Valuable Table: Chronology of Major Polish Translations

| Year | Translator | Publisher | Notes |
|----|----|----|----|
| 1898–1900 | J. Wołowski | Unknown (Serialized) | The first complete Polish translation, introducing the novel to Poland.<sup>72</sup> |
| 1963 | Kazimiera Iłłakowiczówna | Państwowy Instytut Wydawniczy (PIW) | Considered the canonical 20th-century version; the standard for generations of readers.<sup>73</sup> |
| 2012 | Kazimiera Iłłakowiczówna | Znak | A popular modern reprint of the classic Iłłakowiczówna translation.<sup>74</sup> |
| 2022 | Jan Cichocki | Świat Książki | A new, contemporary translation aimed at modernizing the language for a new audience.<sup>73</sup> |

This timeline clearly illustrates the recurring cultural impulse to
re-engage with and reinterpret a classic text. Each major translation
marks a moment when Polish culture decided it was time to speak with
Tolstoy again, in a voice that reflected its own time.

### Anna Karenina in the Polish Classroom

The place of *Anna Karenina* in the Polish education system is a
fascinating case study in the difference between a "cultural canon" and
a strict "curricular canon."

- **Status as *Lektura***: Numerous Polish booksellers and publishers
  explicitly market their editions of the novel as a *lektura dla szkół
  średnich* (required reading for high schools).<sup>79</sup> They often
  note that the book belongs to the literary canon and could potentially
  appear on the  
  *matura*, the national high school exit exam.<sup>80</sup> This
  marketing suggests a strong, popular association between the novel and
  the Polish educational system.

- **The Matura Question**: Despite these claims, a review of the
  official lists of mandatory readings (*lektury obowiązkowe*) for the
  Polish *matura* in recent years, published by the Centralna Komisja
  Egzaminacyjna (CKE), does not include *Anna Karenina* for either the
  basic or extended levels.<sup>81</sup> Other major works of Russian
  literature, such as Fyodor Dostoevsky's  
  *Crime and Punishment* and Mikhail Bulgakov's *The Master and
  Margarita*, are officially listed.<sup>82</sup>

This discrepancy is significant. While publishers have a clear
commercial incentive to label a classic novel as relevant to the
all-important *matura* exam, the persistent cultural belief that it *is*
a school text points to a deeper truth. *Anna Karenina* holds a powerful
place in Poland's "cultural canon," even if it is not always part of the
strict, government-mandated "curricular canon." It is most likely
treated as a *lektura uzupełniająca* (supplementary reading), a text
that educators and the broader culture deem essential for a well-rounded
literary education. Its powerful themes of tragic love, social
hypocrisy, moral choice, and the suffering woman are highly relevant to
topics discussed in the Polish curriculum and provide a valuable point
of comparison to core Polish literary works like Bolesław Prus's *The
Doll* (*Lalka*).<sup>87</sup> Therefore, the novel's educational impact
in Poland is defined not by its mandatory status, but by its enduring
cultural weight and its utility as a foundational text of world
literature.

### On the Polish Stage and in Polish Criticism

*Anna Karenina* has also had a vibrant life in Polish high culture,
particularly on the stage.

- **Theatrical Adaptations**: The most prominent Polish adaptation is
  the ballet choreographed by the world-renowned Alexei Ratmansky, which
  premiered at Warsaw's Teatr Wielki – Opera Narodowa (Polish National
  Opera) on November 19, 2008.<sup>89</sup> The production was praised
  by Polish critics for its modern sensibility, using video
  visualizations and a "film-like pace" to focus on the intense,
  universal drama of the central love triangle.<sup>89</sup> The Polish
  theatre encyclopedia and archives, such as e-teatr.pl, document
  numerous other stage productions across the country, confirming its
  status as a recurring staple of the Polish repertoire.<sup>90</sup> A
  radio play adaptation was also produced by Polskie Radio in 2020,
  directed by Katarzyna Michałkiewicz, which offered a modernized
  psychological interpretation of Anna's character.<sup>94</sup>

- **Critical and Academic Reception**: While detailed records of
  19th-century Polish critical reception require deeper archival
  research in sources like the Jagiellonian Digital Library, modern
  Polish reviews and blogs consistently praise the novel for its
  profound psychological depth, complex characters, and timeless
  relevance.<sup>95</sup> Polish academic databases such as BazHum and
  CEJSH feature scholarly articles that reference  
  *Anna Karenina*, often in the context of film adaptation studies,
  comparative literature, and scriptwriting analysis, indicating its
  firm place in Polish academic discourse.<sup>98</sup>

- **The Unique Polish Lens**: It is impossible to separate the Polish
  reading of a Russian novel from the two nations' shared and often
  painful history. For Polish readers in the 19th and early 20th
  centuries, the novel's depiction of a powerful, centralized, and
  socially rigid Russian Empire was not an exotic setting but a
  political reality they lived under during the period of the
  Partitions. The novel's themes of an individual's struggle for freedom
  against an oppressive social order would have resonated with
  particular force, creating a unique subtext shaped by Poland's own
  national struggle for independence.

### The Digital Echo: Modern Polish Readership

In the 21st century, the conversation about *Anna Karenina* in Poland
has moved online. The novel is actively discussed, rated, and reviewed
on Polish reader-focused platforms. On Lubimyczytać.pl, Poland's largest
social cataloging website for books, the novel has thousands of ratings
and hundreds of reviews, demonstrating a large, engaged, and opinionated
contemporary readership that exists well beyond the confines of the
classroom.<sup>77</sup> This vibrant digital life ensures that Tolstoy's
masterpiece remains a living part of Polish literary culture.

## Part V: The Enduring Legacy

More than 140 years after its publication, *Anna Karenina* continues to
exert a powerful influence on global culture. Its story has proven
remarkably adaptable, finding new life in every medium, from the silver
screen to social media, while its central questions about life and love
continue to challenge and captivate new generations of readers.

### From Page to Screen and Beyond: Anna Karenina in Modern Media

The novel's afterlife has been most visible in its countless
adaptations, which have translated Tolstoy's dense psychological prose
into new visual and digital languages.

- **A Cinematic Legacy**: With over 25 film adaptations, *Anna Karenina*
  is one of the most frequently filmed novels in history.<sup>22</sup>
  This long cinematic tradition has seen some of the world's most iconic
  actresses take on the title role, including Greta Garbo (1935), Vivien
  Leigh (1948), and Keira Knightley (2012).<sup>69</sup> The 2012
  version, directed by Joe Wright with a screenplay by Tom Stoppard, is
  particularly notable for its bold and highly stylized concept. Much of
  the film is set within a decaying 19th-century theatre, with scenes
  transitioning as if stage sets are being changed.<sup>98</sup> This
  was a deliberate artistic choice to reflect the performative,
  theatrical, and hypocritical nature of Russian high society, where
  every action was a public performance for a judgmental
  audience.<sup>10</sup>

- **The Digital Age**: Tolstoy's 19th-century masterpiece has found a
  surprisingly robust home in 21st-century digital culture.

  - **BookTube and YouTube**: A thriving community of "BookTubers"
    creates content for a global audience, from in-depth video essays
    analyzing the novel's themes to casual reading vlogs documenting the
    experience of tackling its 800-plus pages.<sup>4</sup> These videos
    often serve as a gateway for young readers, making the classic text
    feel more accessible and demonstrating its modern
    relevance.<sup>103</sup>

  - **TikTok and BookTok**: On the short-form video app TikTok, the
    novel is a recurring topic under hashtags like \#annakarenina (which
    has millions of views) and the broader \#BookTok
    community.<sup>105</sup> Users share their emotional reactions,
    debate the characters' choices, and often praise the novel's
    surprisingly "easy to read" and entertaining quality despite its
    daunting reputation.<sup>105</sup> The lavish costumes from the 2012
    film are also a popular source of aesthetic inspiration on the
    platform.<sup>106</sup>

  - **Fan Communities and Fanfiction**: The novel has inspired a
    dedicated fan culture. On platforms like Archive of Our Own (AO3)
    and Wattpad, fanfiction writers create new narratives set within
    Tolstoy's world. These stories often explore "what if" scenarios,
    delve deeper into the psychology of secondary characters, or place
    the characters in alternate universes (AUs), demonstrating a deep
    and creative engagement with the source material.<sup>110</sup>
    Online forums, particularly on Reddit, host vibrant communities that
    conduct chapter-by-chapter read-alongs and engage in detailed,
    scholarly-level discussions about the text's nuances.<sup>45</sup>

### Why It Still Hits Different: A Conclusion for Young Readers

*Anna Karenina* has survived for nearly a century and a half not because
it is a required text, but because it speaks to the fundamental,
unchanging truths of the human condition. For a young reader navigating
the complexities of modern life, the novel offers a powerful and deeply
relatable exploration of themes that are more relevant than ever.

The search for identity is at the novel's core. Both Anna and Levin are
profoundly lost, struggling to understand who they are and what their
purpose is in a world of confusing and contradictory
expectations.<sup>5</sup> Anna's rebellion against a suffocating
marriage and a hypocritical society is a timeless story of an individual
fighting for the right to define her own life.<sup>6</sup> Her story is
a tragic but essential case study in the consequences of choosing
passionate self-fulfillment over social duty, raising questions about
the price of freedom.

The novel's exploration of relationships—the intoxicating rush of new
love, the quiet comfort of a stable partnership, the corrosive power of
jealousy, and the deep pain of betrayal—is rendered with a psychological
honesty that transcends its historical setting.<sup>5</sup> Furthermore,
its candid depiction of mental health struggles, particularly Anna's
descent into anxiety, depression, and paranoia, feels remarkably modern
and provides a powerful lens through which to discuss these critical
issues today.<sup>7</sup>

Ultimately, *Anna Karenina* endures because it offers no easy
answers.<sup>52</sup> Tolstoy presents two paths—Anna's path of
passionate love and Levin's path of family and faith—and leaves the
reader to grapple with the profound questions they raise. What is a
happy life? Is it found in obeying the rules or in breaking them? Is
true meaning discovered through romantic love, duty to one's family, or
a higher spiritual purpose? These are the questions that every
generation must answer for itself. By refusing to provide a simple
moral, Tolstoy created a work of art that remains as challenging, as
moving, and as essential today as the day it was written.<sup>4</sup>

## Appendix A: A Student's Guide to Sourcing

Navigating the world of information requires a critical eye. For any
academic project, from a high school essay to a university thesis, the
quality of your sources determines the quality of your work. This guide
provides a simple hierarchy for evaluating sources, with a special focus
on Polish academic resources.

#### 🟢 Trust These Sources (High Reliability)

These are the foundation of strong academic research. They have
undergone rigorous fact-checking, editing, or peer-review processes.

- **University Websites and Presses**: Materials published by
  universities (e.g., on domains ending in .edu, .ac.uk, .edu.pl) and
  their associated presses (e.g., Oxford University Press, Cambridge
  University Press, Wydawnictwo Naukowe UJ) are typically written and
  vetted by experts in the field.

- **Peer-Reviewed Journals**: These are the gold standard for academic
  research. Articles are reviewed by a panel of experts before
  publication to ensure accuracy and scholarly rigor. You can find them
  through databases like JSTOR, Project MUSE, and Scopus. A source
  marked with \*\*\*\* indicates it is peer-reviewed.

- **Major Cultural Institutions and Museums**: Official websites and
  publications from institutions like the British Library, the Teatr
  Wielki – Opera Narodowa, or major museums provide reliable, curated
  information.

- **Established News Outlets**: Reputable newspapers and magazines with
  a history of editorial oversight and fact-checking (e.g., *The New
  York Times*, *The Guardian*, *Rzeczpospolita*) can be good sources for
  reception history and contemporary analysis.

- **Trusted Polish Sources**: For research on Polish topics, prioritize
  **Culture.pl** (an institute promoting Polish culture), the **Instytut
  Książki** (Book Institute), national and university digital libraries
  like **Polona.pl** and the **Jagiellońska Biblioteka Cyfrowa**, and
  Polish academic databases like **BazHum** and **CEJSH (The Central
  European Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities)**.<sup>100</sup>

#### 🟡 Use With Caution (Medium Reliability)

These sources can be useful for finding leads or understanding popular
opinion, but their claims must be verified with more reliable sources.

- **Wikipedia**: An excellent starting point for an overview of a topic.
  However, it is user-edited. Always scroll to the bottom and check the
  original sources cited in the "References" section. Never cite
  Wikipedia itself in a formal academic paper.

- **Reputable Blogs and YouTube Channels**: Content from individuals
  with clear expertise (e.g., a literature professor's blog or a
  BookTuber known for well-researched video essays) can be insightful.
  Always check the creator's credentials and see if they cite their
  sources.

- **Polish Reader Forums**: Websites like **Lubimyczytać.pl** are
  invaluable for gauging the popular reception of a book in Poland, but
  individual user reviews should be treated as opinion, not
  fact.<sup>77</sup> Student forums like  
  **sciaga.pl** often contain summaries but can be prone to errors.

#### 🔴 Avoid These (Low Reliability)

These sources lack credibility and should not be used for academic work.

- **Anonymous Posts and Unverified Claims**: Information from anonymous
  accounts on forums or social media without any supporting evidence is
  unreliable.

- **"Clickbait" and Ad-Heavy Sites**: Websites designed primarily to
  generate ad revenue often prioritize sensationalism over accuracy.

- **Un-cited "Top 10" Lists**: These are typically opinion-based and
  lack scholarly rigor.

- **AI-Generated Content without Human Verification**: While AI tools
  can help with brainstorming, their outputs can contain factual errors
  or "hallucinations" and should never be used as a primary source
  without thorough fact-checking.

- **Polish "Cheat Sheet" Sites**: Websites like **Bryka.pl** are
  notorious among Polish educators for containing inaccuracies and
  oversimplifications. Avoid them for serious research.

Pro-Tip: The Rule of Three

If you find a surprising or controversial fact, make it a habit to find
at least two other independent, reliable sources that confirm it before
you include it in your work. This practice builds strong research habits
and protects you from spreading misinformation.

## Appendix B: Missing Sources and Areas for Further Research

This report aims to be exhaustive based on the provided materials, but a
truly comprehensive study is an ongoing process. The following areas
were identified as having limited source coverage or requiring deeper
investigation:

- **19th-Century Polish Reception**: While modern Polish reception is
  well-documented, specific critical reviews and debates from the time
  of the first Polish translation (1898–1900) in major Polish literary
  journals of the era (e.g., *Ateneum*, *Prawda*) were not available in
  the provided sources. Further research using digitized archives like
  the Jagiellońska Biblioteka Cyfrowa would be necessary to fill this
  gap.

- **Reception in Africa and South America**: The available sources
  provided detailed reception history for Europe, North America, and
  parts of Asia, but lacked specific information on how *Anna Karenina*
  was received in African and South American literary circles, beyond
  general references to Portuguese and Spanish translations.

- **Official Matura Exam Appearances**: While the novel is culturally
  associated with the Polish *matura*, concrete statistical data from
  the Centralna Komisja Egzaminacyjna (CKE) detailing its specific
  appearances on exam papers over the decades could not be located. Such
  data would provide a definitive answer to its role in the examination
  system.

- **UNESCO Memory of the World Register**: Sources confirm that
  Tolstoy's personal library and manuscript collection are inscribed on
  the UNESCO Memory of the World Register.<sup>124</sup> However, there
  is no evidence to suggest that the published work  
  *Anna Karenina* itself has received a separate, specific recognition
  from UNESCO.

- **Untranslatable Linguistic Nuances**: While the general challenge of
  translating Tolstoy's tone was noted, a more detailed linguistic
  analysis of specific "untranslatable" Russian idioms, cultural
  references, or grammatical structures and how different translators
  have attempted to solve them would require a dedicated comparative
  study of multiple translated editions.

## Bibliography

### A. Primary Sources

1.  Tolstoy, Leo. *Anna Karenina*. Translated by Constance Garnett,
    Project Gutenberg, 2008. <sup>126</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

2.  Tolstoy, Leo. *Anna Karenina*. Russian-English dual-language text
    excerpt. LearningRussian.net. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>127</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

3.  Tolstoy, Leo. *Anna Karenina*. Russian text excerpt. Marxists.org.
    Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>128</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

4.  Tolstoy, Leo. Correspondence and Diaries. As cited in various
    secondary sources. <sup>11</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

### B. Secondary Sources

#### Polish Language Sources

5.  Antykwariat Warszawa. "Anna Karenina Powieść T. I-II Lew Tolstoj
    Tłum. Kazimiera Iłłakowiczówna 1963." Antykwariatwaw.pl. Accessed
    July 25, 2025. <sup>75</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

6.  "Anna Karenina - Lew Tołstoj - recenzja." 3telnia.pl, n.d. Accessed
    July 25, 2025. <sup>95</sup> ⭐⭐

7.  "Anna Karenina w historycznej interpretacji Mieczysława Voita."
    Polskie Radio, 18 Jan. 2021. <sup>131</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

8.  "Anna Karenina." Wikipedia (Polish). Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>72</sup> ⭐⭐

9.  "Anna Karenina." Wydawnictwo WAM. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>74</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

10. "Anna Karenina (2012) - Analiza filmoznawcza." Edukacja Filmowa.
    Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>88</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

11. "Anna Karenina. Tom 1." Empik. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>79</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

12. "Anna Karenina. Tom 2." TaniaKsiazka.pl. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>80</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

13. "Anna Karenina." Taniaksiazka.pl. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>132</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

14. "Anna Karenina." Empik. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>133</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

15. "Anna Karenina." Gandalf.com.pl. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>134</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

16. "Anna Karenina. Słuchowisko Lwa Tołstoja w reżyserii Katarzyny
    Michałkiewicz." Polskie Radio, 10 Jun. 2020. <sup>94</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

17. "Anna Karenina." Encyklopedia teatru polskiego. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>91</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

18. "Anna Karenina." Teatr Wielki - Opera Narodowa \| e-teatr.pl.
    Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>90</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

19. "BIP CKE - Lista lektur maturalnych." Centralna Komisja
    Egzaminacyjna, 2023. <sup>82</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

20. "Cyfrowe archiwa czasopism polskich XIX wiek." Wojewódzka Biblioteka
    Publiczna im. Hieronima Łopacińskiego w Lublinie. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>135</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

21. "Digitalizacja czasopism regionalnych z lat 1887–1939." Śląska
    Biblioteka Cyfrowa. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>136</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

22. "Jagiellońska Biblioteka Cyfrowa." Wolne Lektury. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>137</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

23. "Jagiellońska Biblioteka Cyfrowa." Feniks Kultura Gov. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>138</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

24. "Jakie lektury były na maturach z polskiego w ostatnich latach?."
    Eska.pl, 3 May 2023. <sup>81</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

25. "Jakie lektury były na maturach w poprzednich latach?" Drogi do
    Kultury, 2024. <sup>83</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

26. Karpowicz-Słowikowska, Sylwia. "O piśmiennictwie rosyjskim na łamach
    warszawskiego 'Przeglądu Tygodniowego' (1866–1899)."
    Repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>139</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

27. "Lew Tołstoj - Anna Karenina." Subiektywnie o książkach (blog), 27
    Jan. 2014. <sup>96</sup> ⭐⭐

28. "Lew Tołstoj." Wikipedia (Polish). Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>76</sup> ⭐⭐

29. "Lew Tołstoj - twórczość." Bryk.pl. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>140</sup> ⭐

30. "Lista lektur obowiązkowych - język polski - matura od 2025 roku."
    Staszic.edu.pl. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>84</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

31. "Lista lektur obowiązkowych z gwiazdką." Matura100procent.pl.
    Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>86</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

32. Lubimyczytac.pl. "Kazimiera Iłłakowiczówna - Lista książek
    tłumacza." Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>77</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

33. "Najlepsze filmy do matury." Wirtualna Polska, 2018. <sup>87</sup>
    ⭐⭐

34. "Notatek.pl - Anna Karenina Opracowanie." Scribd. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>141</sup> ⭐

35. "52 lektury, które każdy maturzysta znać musi." Perspektywy.pl.
    Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>85</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

36. "Rocznik Towarzystwa Literackiego im. Adama Mickiewicza."
    Towarzystwo-literackie.org. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>142</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

37. Romaniuk, Radosław. "Książki 'zbójeckie' Tołstoja." Teologia
    Polityczna, 2018. <sup>143</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

38. "Symbol konia w literaturze." Bryk.pl. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>144</sup> ⭐

39. Wawrzkiewicz, Marek. "Nowa Anna Karenina." Związek Literatów
    Polskich, 2022. <sup>73</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

40. "XIX edycja Gliwickich Spotkań Teatralnych." e-teatr.pl. Accessed
    July 25, 2025. <sup>92</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

41. Zawiszewska, Agata. "Recepcja literatury rosyjskiej na łamach
    'Wiadomości Literackich' (1924–1939)." Zawiszewska.pl. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>145</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### English Language Sources

42. "Adaptations of Anna Karenina." Wikipedia. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>69</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

43. Aithor.com. "The Influence of Anna's Character on Themes and Plot
    Development in Leo Tolstoy's Novel Anna Karenina." 2024.
    <sup>5</sup> ⭐⭐

44. Alameddine, Rabih. "Reading 'Anna Karenina' in Beirut." *Los Angeles
    Review of Books*, 2 Feb. 2014. <sup>65</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

45. "Anna Karenina." Shmoop. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>20</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

46. "Anna Karenina." Wikipedia. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>30</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

47. "Anna Karenina (1948 film)." Wikipedia. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>148</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

48. "Anna Karenina (soundtrack)." Wikipedia. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>149</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

49. "Anna Karenina: Vronsky's Story." Wikipedia. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>150</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

50. "Anna Karenina." Encyclopedia.com. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>151</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

51. "Anna Karenina." Britannica Kids. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>46</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

52. "Anna Karenina." Britannica. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>152</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

53. "Anna Karenina." SparkNotes. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>13</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

54. "Anna Karenina Characters." SparkNotes. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>154</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

55. "Anna Karenina Plot Analysis." SparkNotes. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>155</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

56. "Anna Karenina Symbols." SparkNotes. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>33</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

57. "Anna Karenina Symbols." LitCharts. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>31</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

58. "Anna Karenina Themes." LitCharts. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>29</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

59. "Anna Karenina: The Good Life." Museum Studies Abroad, 2018.
    <sup>156</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

60. Avalon, Jillian. "Life and Death: Spiritual Philosophy in Anna
    Karenina." *CMC Senior Theses*, 2013. <sup>48</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

61. Batschelet, Sarah. "Spuck's Anna Karenina journeys to Hong Kong."
    Bachtrack, 26 Feb. 2019. <sup>62</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

62. Blaisdell, Bob. "The Everyday Inspiration for Anna Karenina." *The
    New Republic*, 29 Aug. 2020. <sup>12</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

63. BookCaps. "Themes in Anna Karenina." Bookcaps.com. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>17</sup> ⭐⭐

64. Bowie, U.R. "'Anna Karenina' THE STEEPLECHASE." *U.R. Bowie on
    Russian Literature* (blog), 5 Jan. 2015. <sup>36</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

65. Britannica. "History of Censorship in Russia." EBSCO Research
    Starters. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>158</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

66. Brooks, Peter. "Anna, Anna, Anna." *Los Angeles Review of Books*, 20
    Dec. 2014. <sup>159</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

67. Chojnacka, Marta Agata. "The Concept of Existence in the Light of
    Leo Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina." *Acta Universitatis Lodziensis. Folia
    Iuridica*, 2020. <sup>122</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

68. "Correspondence to S. A. Tolstoy and T. A. Kuzminskaya: on the
    Creative History of the Novel 'Anna Karenina'." *Izvestiia
    Rossiiskoi akademii nauk Seriia literatury i iazyka*, vol. 83, no.
    6, 2024, pp. 44-59. <sup>129</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

69. "Cultural and Historical Influences in Anna Karenina." Prezi
    presentation, 2023. <sup>18</sup> ⭐⭐

70. "Day tour to Yasnaya Polyana and Tula." Rusmania.com. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>124</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

71. Driehaus Museum Blog. "Anna Karenina: How America's Gilded Age
    Social Customs Mirrored Russia's." 14 Dec. 2012. <sup>2</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

72. Esposito, Veronica. "How Many Ways Can Something Be Untranslatable?"
    *World Literature Today*, July 2024. <sup>160</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

73. Evans, Robert C., editor. *Critical Insights: Anna Karenina*. Salem
    Press, 2016. <sup>161</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

74. "Films based on Anna Karenina." Wikipedia Category. Accessed July
    25, 2025. <sup>70</sup> ⭐⭐

75. "From Novel to Screenplay to Unique Setting." Focus Features article
    on Joe Wright's *Anna Karenina*. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>10</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

76. Green, Stephanie. "Anna Karenina: A Mixed Reception." Green Writing
    Room (blog), 8 Aug. 2013. <sup>162</sup> ⭐⭐

77. GradesFixer. "The Use of the Muzhik Image in 'Anna Karenina'." 29
    Jun. 2018. <sup>32</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

78. Goodreads. "Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy." Various editions.
    Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>44</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

79. Goodreads Discussion. "Anna Karenina - Same-Sex attraction."
    2012-2025. <sup>165</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

80. Goodreads Discussion. "Miranda's Review." 2011. <sup>166</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

81. "HIST 0023 301: Anna Karenina's Russia." University of Pennsylvania
    Course Syllabus, Fall 2022. <sup>1</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

82. "History of Russian Literature." Britannica. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>152</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

83. Irawan, Dedi, et al. "Reading Anna's Instability and Fear of
    Abandonment in Anna Karenina." *ISLLAC: Journal of Intensive Studies
    on Language, Literature, Art, and Culture*, vol. 7, no. 2, 2023.
    <sup>7</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

84. Journal of L.M. Montgomery Studies. "Reception of L.M. Montgomery's
    Anne of Green Gables in Brazilian Context." 2021. <sup>167</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

85. McKenna, Kevin. "Tolstoy's Anna Karenina: An Epic of 19th-Century
    Russian." University of Vermont Course Page. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>14</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

86. Maitzen, Rohan. "'And such is the meaning of all existence': Levin
    and Anna Karenina." *Novel Readings* (blog), 30 Dec. 2012.
    <sup>50</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

87. Malyk, T. "The Film Plot of the Novel Anna Karenina by L. Tolstoy."
    Sci-press.ru, 2019. <sup>123</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

88. Mellino, Anne. "Anna Karenina: French in the late 19th Century
    Russian Court." My French Life, 26 Apr. 2012. <sup>23</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

89. Pasternak-Slater, Nicolas, and Maya Slater. "On Translating Anna
    Karenina." Reading in Translation, 21 Jul. 2025. <sup>43</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

90. Quinton, Joseph David. "Philosophy and Rationalism in Levin from
    Tolstoy's Anna Karenina." Davidcharles.info, n.d. <sup>49</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐

91. Raulff, Ulrich. "The Horse: Beloved Metaphor of Your Favorite
    19th-Century Novelists." Literary Hub, 12 Feb. 2018. <sup>35</sup>
    ⭐⭐⭐⭐

92. Reddit. "/r/literature - Tolstoy's Anna Karenina: An incredibly
    moving..." 2021. <sup>9</sup> ⭐⭐

93. Reddit. "/r/literature - Why are Anna Karenina, Kitty, and Levin all
    so emotionally unstable?" 2023. <sup>8</sup> ⭐⭐

94. Reddit. "/r/RSbookclub - Anna Karenina Part 1 Discussion
    Thread." 2023. <sup>118</sup> ⭐⭐

95. Reddit. "/r/RussianLiterature - Please stay away from Garnett
    translations..." 2023. <sup>42</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

96. Reddit. "/r/thehemingwaylist - Anna Karenina Part 6, Chapter 25
    Discussion Post." 2020. <sup>117</sup> ⭐⭐

97. Reddit. "/r/tolstoy - How Tolstoy wrote Anna Karenina." 2013.
    <sup>11</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

98. "Resurrection (Tolstoy novel)." Wikipedia. Accessed July 25, 2025.
    <sup>169</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

99. "Review: Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy." The Lit Bitch (blog), 28
    Jul. 2012. <sup>170</sup> ⭐⭐

100. "Review: Anna Karenina." Counterfire, 2012. <sup>16</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

101. Rodrigues, M. "The Reception of L. M. Montgomery's Anne of Green
     Gables in the Brazilian Context." *Journal of L.M. Montgomery
     Studies*, 2021. <sup>167</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

102. "The Role of the Muzhik in Anna Karenina." GradesFixer, 2018.
     <sup>32</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

103. Rougle, William. "The Reception of Lev Tolstoy in Portugal
     (1886-1920)." *Forma de Vida*, 2023. <sup>68</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

104. Shmoop. "Frou Frou in Anna Karenina." Shmoop.com. Accessed July
     25, 2025. <sup>34</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

105. Sites at Duke. "Reviews of Anna Karenina." Unsuitable, 2016.
     <sup>54</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

106. ThoughtCo. "Anna Karenina Quotes." 2019. <sup>171</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

107. TikTok. Various videos under \#annakarenina. Accessed July
     25, 2025. <sup>106</sup> ⭐⭐

108. Tolstoy, Leo. "Anna Karenina." Goodreads. Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>44</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

109. "Tolstoy's Personal Library and Manuscripts, Photo and Film
     Collection." UNESCO Memory of the World. Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>125</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

110. "The Use of the Muzhik Image in 'Anna Karenina'."
     GradesFixer, 2018. <sup>32</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

111. "Why Anna Karenina Remains a Literary Masterpiece." Polyglottist
     Language Academy, 2025. <sup>3</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

112. Wyzant Ask an Expert. "Is Frou-Frou's death a foreshadowing of
     Anna's in Anna Karenina?" 2019. <sup>37</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

113. "Yasnaya Polyana: Home of Leo Tolstoy." Literary Traveler. Accessed
     July 25, 2025. <sup>173</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

114. YouTube. "Anna Karenina \| In-Depth Book Analysis." The Literature
     Digest, 2023. <sup>4</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

115. YouTube. "Let's Read Anna Karenina." nix reads, 2023.
     <sup>174</sup> ⭐⭐

116. YouTube. "Reading ANNA KARENINA for the First Time." JAK and the
     Book Stack, 2023. <sup>103</sup> ⭐⭐

117. YouTube. "Why Anna Karenina is the most real character in all of
     literature." Video Essay, 2024. <sup>104</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

118. Zalamabani, Maria. *Il matrimonio nella Russia di Tolstoj*. Firenze
     University Press, 2017. <sup>175</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Other Language Sources (Non-Polish/English)

119. "Ana Karenina (Portuguese Edition)." AbeBooks. Accessed July
     25, 2025. <sup>176</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

120. "Ana Karenina." Wikipedia (Spanish). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>177</sup> ⭐⭐

121. "Anna Karenina." SensCritique (French). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>178</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

122. "Anna Karenina." LovelyBooks.de (German). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>179</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

123. "Anna Karenina." Buchhexe.com (German). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>180</sup> ⭐⭐

124. "Anna Karenina, recensioni." LaFeltrinelli.it (Italian). Accessed
     July 25, 2025. <sup>181</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

125. "Anna Karenina, recensioni." IBS.it (Italian). Accessed July
     25, 2025. <sup>182</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

126. "Anna Karénine – Léon Tolstoï." Des Livres, Des Livres (French
     blog), 25 Jan. 2013. <sup>183</sup> ⭐⭐

127. "Anna Karénine." Lireka (French). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>184</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

128. "Anna Karénine." Critiques Libres (French). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>185</sup> ⭐⭐

129. "Anna Karénina." FNAC (Portuguese). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>186</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

130. "Ana Karenina." Cultura Genial (Spanish). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>187</sup> ⭐⭐

131. "Ana Karenina." GetAbstract (German). Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>22</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

132. Chen, Nan. "Chinese rendition of Anna Karenina proves a big hit."
     *China Daily*, 20 Mar. 2023. <sup>60</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

133. "La ricezione di 'Anna Karenina' in Italia nel XIX secolo." Rivista
     Tradurre, 2015. <sup>55</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

134. "Tolstoy: Anna Karenina <span dir="rtl">آنا كارنينا</span>." Jarir
     Books USA. Accessed July 25, 2025. <sup>188</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

135. "Translation of Anna Karenina (<span dir="rtl">آنا
     كارنينا</span>)." ABC Books LLC. Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>189</sup> ⭐⭐⭐

136. "Unveiling Russian Language as a Propaganda Tool."
     ResearchGate, 2024. <sup>190</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

137. Vays, A. "La elaboración del canon en la literatura española del
     siglo XIX." Cervantes Virtual. Accessed July 25, 2025.
     <sup>191</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

138. "Wissenstagebuch - Leserunde: Lew Tolstoi – Anna Karenina."
     Wissenstagebuch.com (German blog), 13 Jul. 2019. <sup>192</sup>
     ⭐⭐

139. Ye, S., et al. "Translation and reader reception of L. N. Tolstoy's
     novels in China." *Cyberleninka*, 2023. <sup>61</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐

140. Zola, Émile. *Traduire Zola du XIXe siècle à nos jours*. Roma
     TrE-Press, 2017. <sup>56</sup> ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### Cytowane prace

1.  The World of Anna Karenina: History 102-301 - Courses InTouch,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://coursesintouch.apps.upenn.edu/cpr/jsp/fast.do?webService=syll&t=202230&c=HIST0023301</u>](https://coursesintouch.apps.upenn.edu/cpr/jsp/fast.do?webService=syll&t=202230&c=HIST0023301)

2.  Anna Karenina: How America's Gilded Age Social Customs Mirrored
    Russia's, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://driehausmuseum.org/blog/view/anna-karenina-how-americas-gilded-age-social-customs-mirrored-russias</u>](https://driehausmuseum.org/blog/view/anna-karenina-how-americas-gilded-age-social-customs-mirrored-russias)

3.  Why Anna Karenina Remains a Literary Masterpiece and Why You Should
    Read It, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.polyglottistlanguageacademy.com/language-culture-travelling-blog/2025/4/20/why-anna-karenina-remains-a-literary-masterpiece-and-why-you-should-read-it</u>](https://www.polyglottistlanguageacademy.com/language-culture-travelling-blog/2025/4/20/why-anna-karenina-remains-a-literary-masterpiece-and-why-you-should-read-it)

4.  Unlocking the Depths of Anna Karenina - In-Depth Analysis &
    Insights - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BRL29E7ztu8</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BRL29E7ztu8)

5.  The Influence of Anna's Character on Themes and Plot Development in
    Leo Tolstoy's Novel "Anna Karenina" \| Free Essay Example for
    Students - Aithor, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://aithor.com/essay-examples/the-influence-of-annas-character-on-themes-and-plot-development-in-leo-tolstoys-novel-anna-karenina</u>](https://aithor.com/essay-examples/the-influence-of-annas-character-on-themes-and-plot-development-in-leo-tolstoys-novel-anna-karenina)

6.  Why do people like Anna Karenina?? : r/tolstoy - Reddit, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/tolstoy/comments/1lhp63h/why_do_people_like_anna_karenina/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/tolstoy/comments/1lhp63h/why_do_people_like_anna_karenina/)

7.  READING ANNA'S INSTABILITY AND FEAR OF ABANDONMENT IN ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://journal2.um.ac.id/index.php/jisllac/article/download/30414/10726</u>](https://journal2.um.ac.id/index.php/jisllac/article/download/30414/10726)

8.  Why are Anna Karenina, Kitty and Levin all so violently jealous and
    moody? - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/11jgdm9/why_are_anna_karenina_kitty_and_levin_all_so/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/11jgdm9/why_are_anna_karenina_kitty_and_levin_all_so/)

9.  Tolstoy's Anna Karenina: An incredibly moving experience that
    concluded last night - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/p877k2/tolstoys_anna_karenina_an_incredibly_moving/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/p877k2/tolstoys_anna_karenina_an_incredibly_moving/)

10. Anna Karenina: From Novel To Screenplay To Unique Setting - Focus
    Features, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://focusfeatures.com/article/from_novel_to_screenplay_to_unique_setting?film=anna_karenina</u>](https://focusfeatures.com/article/from_novel_to_screenplay_to_unique_setting?film=anna_karenina)

11. How Tolstoy wrote Anna Karenina : r/tolstoy - Reddit, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/tolstoy/comments/1knvhy6/how_tolstoy_wrote_anna_karenina/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/tolstoy/comments/1knvhy6/how_tolstoy_wrote_anna_karenina/)

12. The Everyday Inspiration for Anna Karenina \| The New Republic,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://newrepublic.com/article/158973/everyday-inspiration-anna-karenina</u>](https://newrepublic.com/article/158973/everyday-inspiration-anna-karenina)

13. Anna Karenina: Leo Tolstoy and Anna Karenina Background ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/context/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/context/)

14. www.uvm.edu, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.uvm.edu/~kmckenna/Anna_Karenina.html#:~:text=Its%20epic%20sweep%20of%2019th,of%20women%20in%20mid%2D19th%2D</u>](https://www.uvm.edu/~kmckenna/Anna_Karenina.html#:~:text=Its%20epic%20sweep%20of%2019th,of%20women%20in%20mid%2D19th%2D)

15. An Appreciation of the Novel Anna Karenina With Special References
    to Russian Cultural History - Scribd, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.scribd.com/document/883026315/An-Appreciation-of-the-Novel-Anna-Karenina-With-Special-References-to-Russian-Cultural-History</u>](https://www.scribd.com/document/883026315/An-Appreciation-of-the-Novel-Anna-Karenina-With-Special-References-to-Russian-Cultural-History)

16. Review: Anna Karenina \| Counterfire, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.counterfire.org/article/review-anna-karenina/</u>](https://www.counterfire.org/article/review-anna-karenina/)

17. Themes: Anna Karenina (Leo Tolstoy) - BookCaps, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.bookcaps.com/themes-anna-karenina</u>](https://www.bookcaps.com/themes-anna-karenina)

18. Cultural and Historical Influences in Anna Karenina - Prezi,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://prezi.com/p/dnmc9gzn0yeq/cultural-and-historical-influences-in-anna-karenina/</u>](https://prezi.com/p/dnmc9gzn0yeq/cultural-and-historical-influences-in-anna-karenina/)

19. Anna Karenina: Themes \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/themes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/themes/)

20. Anna Karenina Analysis \| Shmoop, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/anna-karenina/literary-devices.html</u>](https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/anna-karenina/literary-devices.html)

21. Is Anna Karenina analogous? Was Tolstoy approved of by the
    aristocracy? I.e. a good peasant who told worthwhile, complex
    stories? : r/literature - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/1d2uwm6/is_anna_karenina_analogous_was_tolstoy_approved/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/1d2uwm6/is_anna_karenina_analogous_was_tolstoy_approved/)

22. Ana Karenina(Spanische Version) von Leo Nikolajewitsch Tolstoi -
    getAbstract, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.getabstract.com/de/zusammenfassung/ana-karenina/34708</u>](https://www.getabstract.com/de/zusammenfassung/ana-karenina/34708)

23. Anna Karenina: French in the late 19th-century Russian Court,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.myfrenchlife.org/2012/04/26/anna-karenina-french-in-the-late-19th-century-russian-court/</u>](https://www.myfrenchlife.org/2012/04/26/anna-karenina-french-in-the-late-19th-century-russian-court/)

24. Did the Russian aristocracy in the 19th century really speak in
    several languages in their every day lives as it is written in
    Tolstoy's Anna Karenina? - Quora, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.quora.com/Did-the-Russian-aristocracy-in-the-19th-century-really-speak-in-several-languages-in-their-every-day-lives-as-it-is-written-in-Tolstoy%E2%80%99s-Anna-Karenina</u>](https://www.quora.com/Did-the-Russian-aristocracy-in-the-19th-century-really-speak-in-several-languages-in-their-every-day-lives-as-it-is-written-in-Tolstoy%E2%80%99s-Anna-Karenina)

25. Tolstoy's Critique of the Superficiality of Russian High Society in
    Anna Karenina and its Parallels to French Aristocracy - The Ohio
    State University, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://kb.osu.edu/bitstreams/5961f3f5-43b1-4b37-8cf8-7872c1374be3/download</u>](https://kb.osu.edu/bitstreams/5961f3f5-43b1-4b37-8cf8-7872c1374be3/download)

26. Representations of Privileged Motherhood in Nineteenth-Century
    Literature: A Comparative Analysis of Leo Tolstoy's Anna Karenina
    and - AUC Knowledge Fountain - The American University in Cairo,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://fount.aucegypt.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1909&context=etds</u>](https://fount.aucegypt.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1909&context=etds)

27. Book Review: Understanding the Fallen Woman During the 19th Century
    (Anna Karenina), otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.readingruffolos.com/book-review-understanding-the-fallen-woman-during-the-19th-century-anna-karenina/</u>](https://www.readingruffolos.com/book-review-understanding-the-fallen-woman-during-the-19th-century-anna-karenina/)

28. View of Society's Role in Tolstoy's Anna Karenina \| Global Insight:
    A Journal of Critical Human Science and Culture, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://globalinsight.journal.library.uta.edu/index.php/globalinsight/article/view/18/4</u>](https://globalinsight.journal.library.uta.edu/index.php/globalinsight/article/view/18/4)

29. Anna Karenina Themes - LitCharts, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/anna-karenina/themes</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/anna-karenina/themes)

30. Anna Karenina - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina)

31. Anna Karenina Symbols \| LitCharts, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/anna-karenina/symbols</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/anna-karenina/symbols)

32. The Use of the Muzhik Image in "Anna Karenina" 1360 words \[Essay
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://gradesfixer.com/free-essay-examples/the-role-of-the-muzhik-in-anna-karenina/</u>](https://gradesfixer.com/free-essay-examples/the-role-of-the-muzhik-in-anna-karenina/)

33. Anna Karenina: Symbols \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/symbols/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/symbols/)

34. Frou Frou in Anna Karenina - Shmoop, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/anna-karenina/frou-frou-symbol.html</u>](https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/anna-karenina/frou-frou-symbol.html)

35. The Horse: Beloved Metaphor of Your Favorite 19th-Century ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lithub.com/the-horse-beloved-metaphor-of-your-favorite-19th-century-novelists/</u>](https://lithub.com/the-horse-beloved-metaphor-of-your-favorite-19th-century-novelists/)

36. "Anna Karenina" THE STEEPLECHASE - U.R. Bowie on Russian Literature,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://classical-russian-literature.blogspot.com/2015/01/anna-karenina-steeplechase.html</u>](http://classical-russian-literature.blogspot.com/2015/01/anna-karenina-steeplechase.html)

37. Is Frou-Frou's death a foreshadowing of Anna's in Anna Karenina?,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://literature.stackexchange.com/questions/2243/is-frou-frous-death-a-foreshadowing-of-annas-in-anna-karenina</u>](https://literature.stackexchange.com/questions/2243/is-frou-frous-death-a-foreshadowing-of-annas-in-anna-karenina)

38. Is Frou-Frou's death a foreshadowing of Anna's in Anna Karenina? \|
    Wyzant Ask An Expert, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.wyzant.com/resources/answers/698863/is-frou-frou-s-death-a-foreshadowing-of-anna-s-in-anna-karenina</u>](https://www.wyzant.com/resources/answers/698863/is-frou-frou-s-death-a-foreshadowing-of-anna-s-in-anna-karenina)

39. A Little Muzhik, Muttering to Himself: The Novel and the Poor Bruce
    Robbins, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://english.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/content/A%20Little%20Muzhik%2C%20Muttering%20to%20Himself.pdf</u>](https://english.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/content/A%20Little%20Muzhik%2C%20Muttering%20to%20Himself.pdf)

40. Anna Karenina - Part 7, Chapter 31 : r/yearofannakarenina - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/yearofannakarenina/comments/r4jcoc/anna_karenina_part_7_chapter_31/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/yearofannakarenina/comments/r4jcoc/anna_karenina_part_7_chapter_31/)

41. Anna Karenina The Philosophical Value of Country Life Quotes -
    SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/quotes/theme/the-philosophical-value-of-country-life/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/quotes/theme/the-philosophical-value-of-country-life/)

42. Please stay away from Garnett translations! Turned Anna Karenina
    into Victorian romance novel : r/RussianLiterature - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/RussianLiterature/comments/1iyjsuo/please_stay_away_from_garnett_translations_turned/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/RussianLiterature/comments/1iyjsuo/please_stay_away_from_garnett_translations_turned/)

43. Forthcoming New Translation of Tolstoy's "Anna Karenina", otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://readingintranslation.com/2025/07/21/nicolas-pasternak-slater-and-maya-slater-on-translating-anna-karenina/</u>](https://readingintranslation.com/2025/07/21/nicolas-pasternak-slater-and-maya-slater-on-translating-anna-karenina/)

44. Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy \| Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/15823480-anna-karenina</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/15823480-anna-karenina)

45. What are your opinions about Anna Karenina (the character)? :
    r/books - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/afzvjw/what_are_your_opinions_about_anna_karenina_the/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/books/comments/afzvjw/what_are_your_opinions_about_anna_karenina_the/)

46. Anna Karenina - Students \| Britannica Kids \| Homework Help,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://kids.britannica.com/students/article/Anna-Karenina/316359</u>](https://kids.britannica.com/students/article/Anna-Karenina/316359)

47. READING ANNA'S INSTABILITY AND FEAR OF ABANDONMENT IN ANNA
    KARENINA - Journal of Universitas Airlangga, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://e-journal.unair.ac.id/LAKON/article/download/36691/23110/182185</u>](https://e-journal.unair.ac.id/LAKON/article/download/36691/23110/182185)

48. Life and Death: Spiritual Philosophy in Anna Karenina - Scholarship
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://scholarship.claremont.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=1762&context=cmc_theses</u>](https://scholarship.claremont.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer&httpsredir=1&article=1762&context=cmc_theses)

49. The Limits of Rationalism: The Existential Journey of Levin in
    Tolstoy's Anna Karenina, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://davidcharles.info/creative-writing/writing-about-writing/philosophy-rationalism-levin-tolstoy-anna-karenina/</u>](https://davidcharles.info/creative-writing/writing-about-writing/philosophy-rationalism-levin-tolstoy-anna-karenina/)

50. “And such is the meaning of all existence!” Levin and Anna Karenina
    – Novel Readings, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://rohanmaitzen.com/2012/12/30/and-such-is-the-meaning-of-all-existence-levin-and-anna-karenina/</u>](https://rohanmaitzen.com/2012/12/30/and-such-is-the-meaning-of-all-existence-levin-and-anna-karenina/)

51. Anna Karenina's Parallel Conflict of Faith and Remorse - Miami
    University WordPress Sites, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://sites.miamioh.edu/havighurst/2019/03/11/anna-kareninas-parallel-conflict-of-faith-and-remorse/</u>](https://sites.miamioh.edu/havighurst/2019/03/11/anna-kareninas-parallel-conflict-of-faith-and-remorse/)

52. 07 Religious Morality in Anna Karenina - Shaheen Foundation,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://shaheenfoundation.co.in/index.php/das-literarisch/issues/item/305-07-religious-morality-in-anna-karenina.html</u>](https://shaheenfoundation.co.in/index.php/das-literarisch/issues/item/305-07-religious-morality-in-anna-karenina.html)

53. War and Peace - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_and_Peace</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_and_Peace)

54. Reviews of Anna Karenina – UNSUITABLE - Sites@Duke Express,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://sites.duke.edu/unsuitable/reviews-of-anna-karenina/</u>](https://sites.duke.edu/unsuitable/reviews-of-anna-karenina/)

55. Alla scoperta del «genio russo» – tradurre, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://rivistatradurre.it/tradurre-dal-russo-2/</u>](https://rivistatradurre.it/tradurre-dal-russo-2/)

56. Traduire Zola, du XIXe siècle à nos jours \| Roma TrE-Press,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://romatrepress.uniroma3.it/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Traduire-Zola-du-XIXesi%C3%A8cle-%C3%A0-nos-jours.pdf</u>](https://romatrepress.uniroma3.it/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Traduire-Zola-du-XIXesi%C3%A8cle-%C3%A0-nos-jours.pdf)

57. Tolstói y la cultura literaria del Derecho en España (1890-1928),
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.comunicacionsocial.es/media/comunicacionsocial/files/sample-108019.pdf</u>](https://www.comunicacionsocial.es/media/comunicacionsocial/files/sample-108019.pdf)

58. Bemerkungen zur Flaubert-Rezeption deutscher Autoren - Zum 125.
    Todestag des Dichters, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://literaturkritik.de/id/8129</u>](https://literaturkritik.de/id/8129)

59. 1\. By Way of Introduction: British Perception, Reception and
    Recognition of Russian Culture, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://books.openedition.org/obp/1561</u>](https://books.openedition.org/obp/1561)

60. Chinese rendition of Anna Karenina proves a big hit - China Daily,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202303/20/WS641874fba31057c47ebb57f1.html</u>](https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202303/20/WS641874fba31057c47ebb57f1.html)

61. Translation and reader reception of L. N. Tolstoy's novels in China
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/translation-and-reader-reception-of-l-n-tolstoys-novels-in-china</u>](https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/translation-and-reader-reception-of-l-n-tolstoys-novels-in-china)

62. Japan Ballet's Anna Karenina \| Bachtrack, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://bachtrack.com/review-jan-2014-jba-karenina-tokyo</u>](https://bachtrack.com/review-jan-2014-jba-karenina-tokyo)

63. Anna Karènina - TNC, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tnc.cat/en/anna-karenina</u>](https://www.tnc.cat/en/anna-karenina)

64. The Influence of Russian Literature in Two Twentieth Century Arabic
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ippo.ru/uploads/rus-lit.pdf</u>](https://www.ippo.ru/uploads/rus-lit.pdf)

65. Reading “Anna Karenina” in Beirut \| Los Angeles Review of Books,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/reading-anna-karenina-beirut/</u>](https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/reading-anna-karenina-beirut/)

66. From Moscow to Mumbai: The Influence of Russian Literature on ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.hercampus.com/school/kcl/from-moscow-to-mumbai-the-influence-of-russian-literature-on-bollywood-movies/</u>](https://www.hercampus.com/school/kcl/from-moscow-to-mumbai-the-influence-of-russian-literature-on-bollywood-movies/)

67. Pages to Frames: The Enduring Influence of Russian Literature in
    Indian Cinema - IJFMR, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ijfmr.com/papers/2022/4/7001.pdf</u>](https://www.ijfmr.com/papers/2022/4/7001.pdf)

68. The Portuguese Answer to Tolstoy — FORMA DE VIDA, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://formadevida.org/wrouglefdv23</u>](https://formadevida.org/wrouglefdv23)

69. Adaptations of Anna Karenina - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_Anna_Karenina</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adaptations_of_Anna_Karenina)

70. Category:Films based on Anna Karenina - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Films_based_on_Anna_Karenina</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Films_based_on_Anna_Karenina)

71. Anna Karenina - opis - TerazTeatr.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.terazteatr.pl/sztuki/anna-karenina,opis,472</u>](https://www.terazteatr.pl/sztuki/anna-karenina,opis,472)

72. Anna Karenina – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina)

73. NOWA „ANNA KARENINA” - Związek Literatów Polskich, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://zlpinfo.eu/aktualnosci/nowa-anna-karenina.html</u>](https://zlpinfo.eu/aktualnosci/nowa-anna-karenina.html)

74. Anna Karenina \| wydawnictwowam.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://wydawnictwowam.pl/prod.anna-karenina.15939.htm</u>](https://wydawnictwowam.pl/prod.anna-karenina.15939.htm)

75. Anna Karenina Powieść T. I-II Lew Tołstoj Tłum. Kazimiera
    Iłłakowiczówna (1963), otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://antykwariatwaw.pl/pl/p/Anna-Karenina-Powiesc-T.-I-II-Lew-Tolstoj-Tlum.-Kazimiera-Illakowiczowna-1963/140357</u>](https://antykwariatwaw.pl/pl/p/Anna-Karenina-Powiesc-T.-I-II-Lew-Tolstoj-Tlum.-Kazimiera-Illakowiczowna-1963/140357)

76. Lew Tołstoj – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lew_To%C5%82stoj</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lew_To%C5%82stoj)

77. Kazimiera Iłłakowiczówna \| Tłumacz: Wszystkie książki, wywiady,
    artykuły \| Lubimyczytać.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/tlumacz/11743/kazimiera-illakowiczowna</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/tlumacz/11743/kazimiera-illakowiczowna)

78. Anna Karenina (Polish Edition) - Tolstoj, Lew: 9788324022151 -
    AbeBooks, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.abebooks.com/9788324022151/Anna-Karenina-Polish-Edition-Tolstoj-8324022155/plp</u>](https://www.abebooks.com/9788324022151/Anna-Karenina-Polish-Edition-Tolstoj-8324022155/plp)

79. Anna Karenina. Tom 1 - Lew Tołstoj \| Książka w Empik - Empik.com,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.empik.com/anna-karenina-tom-1-lew-tolstoj,p1503190609,ksiazka-p</u>](https://www.empik.com/anna-karenina-tom-1-lew-tolstoj,p1503190609,ksiazka-p)

80. Anna Karenina T.2 Lew Tołstoj książka \| TaniaKsiazka.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/anna-karenina-tom-2-lew-tolstoj</u>](https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/anna-karenina-tom-2-lew-tolstoj)

81. Jakie lektury były na maturach z polskiego w ostatnich latach?
    \[LISTA\] - ESKA.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.eska.pl/news/jakie-lektury-byly-na-maturach-z-polskiego-w-ostatnich-latach-lista-aa-ydfc-CNAh-YvPd.html</u>](https://www.eska.pl/news/jakie-lektury-byly-na-maturach-z-polskiego-w-ostatnich-latach-lista-aa-ydfc-CNAh-YvPd.html)

82. Aneks do Informatora o egzaminie maturalnym z języka polskiego jako
    przedmiotu obowiązkowego obowiązujący w latach szkolny - CKE,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bip.cke.gov.pl/attachments/download/9283</u>](https://bip.cke.gov.pl/attachments/download/9283)

83. Jakie lektury były na maturach w poprzednich latach? Sprawdź listę!,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://drogidokultury.pl/jakie-lektury-byly-na-maturach-w-poprzednich-latach/</u>](https://drogidokultury.pl/jakie-lektury-byly-na-maturach-w-poprzednich-latach/)

84. Lektury obowiązkowe – język polski (matura od 2025 roku) ZAKRES
    PODSTAWOWY ZAKRES ROZSZERZONY 1) Biblia, w tym fragmenty Ksi,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.staszic.edu.pl/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Lista-lektur-obowi%C4%85zkowych-j%C4%99zyk-polski-matura-od-2025-roku.pdf</u>](https://www.staszic.edu.pl/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/Lista-lektur-obowi%C4%85zkowych-j%C4%99zyk-polski-matura-od-2025-roku.pdf)

85. 52 lektury, które maturzysta znać musi - Portal edukacyjny
    Perspektywy, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://perspektywy.pl/portal/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=211:52-lektury-ktore-kazdy-maturzysta-znac-musi&Itemid=180</u>](https://perspektywy.pl/portal/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=211:52-lektury-ktore-kazdy-maturzysta-znac-musi&Itemid=180)

86. Lista lektur obowiązkowych (z gwiazdką) - Kursy maturalne -
    Matura100procent, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://matura100procent.pl/lista-lektur-obowiazkowych-z-gwiazdka/</u>](https://matura100procent.pl/lista-lektur-obowiazkowych-z-gwiazdka/)

87. Najlepsze filmy do matury - WP Film, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://film.wp.pl/najlepsze-filmy-do-matury-6310035117312129g</u>](https://film.wp.pl/najlepsze-filmy-do-matury-6310035117312129g)

88. Anna Karenina (2012) - Edukacja Filmowa, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://edukacjafilmowa.pl/anna-karenina-2012/</u>](https://edukacjafilmowa.pl/anna-karenina-2012/)

89. Anna Karenina : Teatr Wielki Opera Narodowa, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://teatrwielki.pl/en/polish-national-ballet/repertoire/anna-karenina/</u>](https://teatrwielki.pl/en/polish-national-ballet/repertoire/anna-karenina/)

90. Anna Karenina - Teatr Wielki - Opera Narodowa \| e-teatr.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://e-teatr.pl/anna-karenina-s8131</u>](https://e-teatr.pl/anna-karenina-s8131)

91. Anna Karenina ::: Przedstawienia - Encyklopedia teatru polskiego,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://encyklopediateatru.pl/przedstawienie/48351/anna-karenina</u>](https://encyklopediateatru.pl/przedstawienie/48351/anna-karenina)

92. Gliwickie Spotkania Teatralne XIX edycja \| e-teatr.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://e-teatr.pl/xix-edycja-e1050</u>](https://e-teatr.pl/xix-edycja-e1050)

93. Anna Karenina - Teatr Wielki - Opera Narodowa \| e-teatr.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://e-teatr.pl/pl/realizacje/42382,szczegoly.html</u>](https://e-teatr.pl/pl/realizacje/42382,szczegoly.html)

94. "Anna Karenina". Słuchowisko Lwa Tołstoja w reżyserii Katarzyny
    Michałkiewicz, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.polskieradio.pl/357/6991/Artykul/2528766,anna-karenina-sluchowisko-lwa-tolstoja-w-rezyserii-katarzyny-michalkiewicz</u>](https://www.polskieradio.pl/357/6991/Artykul/2528766,anna-karenina-sluchowisko-lwa-tolstoja-w-rezyserii-katarzyny-michalkiewicz)

95. Anna Karenina – Lew Tołstoj - recenzja - 3telnia, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://3telnia.pl/anna-karenina-lew-tolstoj-recenzja/</u>](https://3telnia.pl/anna-karenina-lew-tolstoj-recenzja/)

96. Lew Tołstoj – "Anna Karenina" \| Subiektywnie o książkach,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.subiektywnieoksiazkach.pl/2014/01/lew-tostoj-anna-karenina.html</u>](https://www.subiektywnieoksiazkach.pl/2014/01/lew-tostoj-anna-karenina.html)

97. "Anna Karenina" Lew Tołstoj - Moje codzienne przyjemności,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://codzienneprzyjemnosci.blogspot.com/2014/04/anna-karenina-lew-tostoj.html</u>](http://codzienneprzyjemnosci.blogspot.com/2014/04/anna-karenina-lew-tostoj.html)

98. Noël Carroll Criticism and Interpretation - Bazhum, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bazhum.muzhp.pl/media/texts/sztuka-i-filozofia-art-and-philosophy/2013-tom-42/sztuka_i_filozofia-r2013-t42-s7-20.pdf</u>](https://bazhum.muzhp.pl/media/texts/sztuka-i-filozofia-art-and-philosophy/2013-tom-42/sztuka_i_filozofia-r2013-t42-s7-20.pdf)

99. (PDF) Polish Journal of English Studies 3.1/2017 - ResearchGate,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341868889_Polish_Journal_of_English_Studies_312017</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341868889_Polish_Journal_of_English_Studies_312017)

100. Anna Karenina - T. Stoppard vs. L. Tolstoy - Journal of Education
     Culture and Society, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://jecs.pl/index.php/jecs/article/view/444/367</u>](https://jecs.pl/index.php/jecs/article/view/444/367)

101. Discussing Books I and II of Anna Karenina with Anna Barker -
     YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBzVSIvENBk</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBzVSIvENBk)

102. Anna Karenina Book vs Movie Can I Enjoy a Movie with Unlikable
     Characters? - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zHP5rIRiJ0s</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zHP5rIRiJ0s)

103. 800 Pages of Drama and Chaos Anna Karenina Reading Vlog - YouTube,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vazqa-QfVZ0</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vazqa-QfVZ0)

104. Joseph Logsdon - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/user/batman5224/videos?app=desktop</u>](https://www.youtube.com/user/batman5224/videos?app=desktop)

105. Anna Karenina : r/literature - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/1j0rtwm/anna_karenina/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/literature/comments/1j0rtwm/anna_karenina/)

106. Exploring Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy - TikTok, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@anna.beilin/video/7505083922221403434</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@anna.beilin/video/7505083922221403434)

107. Anna Karenina: A Deep Dive into Classic Literature \| TikTok,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@lislevonrhoman/video/7486268247327657238</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@lislevonrhoman/video/7486268247327657238)

108. Struggling with Anna Karenina: A Book Review \| TikTok, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@burymeinbooksuk/video/7193043575150497029</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@burymeinbooksuk/video/7193043575150497029)

109. Need opinions stat…I personally think a deep, intense love can
     drive a... \| Anna Karenina \| TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@haleyahernauthor/video/7490719353483054367</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@haleyahernauthor/video/7490719353483054367)

110. ?Favourite Stories? - PrincessBelle1221 - Wattpad, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.wattpad.com/list/618885546-favourite-stories</u>](https://www.wattpad.com/list/618885546-favourite-stories)

111. Anna Karenina (2012) - Works \| Archive of Our Own, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://archiveofourown.org/tags/Anna%20Karenina%20(2012)/works</u>](https://archiveofourown.org/tags/Anna%20Karenina%20(2012)/works)

112. Anna Karenina - Leo Tolstoy - Wattpad, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.wattpad.com/story/6932910-anna-karenina</u>](https://www.wattpad.com/story/6932910-anna-karenina)

113. MODERN-DAY PERIODICALS: FAN-FICTION AND THE PLATFORMS WHERE THEY
     ARE HOSTED, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://scindeks-clanci.ceon.rs/data/pdf/1821-0686/2023/1821-06862316191I.pdf</u>](https://scindeks-clanci.ceon.rs/data/pdf/1821-0686/2023/1821-06862316191I.pdf)

114. Forms (History 3) - The New Cambridge History of Russian
     Literature, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/new-cambridge-history-of-russian-literature/forms/F2F5CDA00C4AAE13D861E5CB8607757C</u>](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/new-cambridge-history-of-russian-literature/forms/F2F5CDA00C4AAE13D861E5CB8607757C)

115. Prestuplenie i nakazanie \| Crime and Punishment - Fyodor
     Dostoyevsky - Works \| Archive of Our Own, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>http://insecure.archiveofourown.org/tags/Fyodor%20Dostoevsky%20-%20Crime%20and%20Punishment/works</u>](http://insecure.archiveofourown.org/tags/Fyodor%20Dostoevsky%20-%20Crime%20and%20Punishment/works)

116. (PDF) Modern-day periodicals: Fan-fiction and the platforms where
     they are hosted, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377950580_Modern-day_periodicals_Fan-fiction_and_the_platforms_where_they_are_hosted</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377950580_Modern-day_periodicals_Fan-fiction_and_the_platforms_where_they_are_hosted)

117. Anna Karenina - Part 6, Chapter 25 - Discussion Post :
     r/thehemingwaylist - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/thehemingwaylist/comments/erewmi/anna_karenina_part_6_chapter_25_discussion_post/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/thehemingwaylist/comments/erewmi/anna_karenina_part_6_chapter_25_discussion_post/)

118. Anna Karenina Part 1 Discussion Thread : r/RSbookclub - Reddit,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/RSbookclub/comments/1i3fssk/anna_karenina_part_1_discussion_thread/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/RSbookclub/comments/1i3fssk/anna_karenina_part_1_discussion_thread/)

119. (PDF) 07 Religious Morality in Anna Karenina - ResearchGate,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384054989_07_Religious_Morality_in_Anna_Karenina</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384054989_07_Religious_Morality_in_Anna_Karenina)

120. Slavonic Culture. Annual Review of the PAU Commission on the
     Culture of the Slavs - ejournals, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://ejournals.eu/en/journal/kultura-slowian</u>](https://ejournals.eu/en/journal/kultura-slowian)

121. Translating Anna Karenina - to the Question About ... - cejsh - ICM
     UW, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>http://cejsh.icm.edu.pl/cejsh/element/bwmeta1.element.ojs-doi-10_15503_jecs20162_307_315</u>](http://cejsh.icm.edu.pl/cejsh/element/bwmeta1.element.ojs-doi-10_15503_jecs20162_307_315)

122. Uniwersytet Szczeciński, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://wnus.usz.edu.pl/aie/file/issue/download/1156.pdf</u>](https://wnus.usz.edu.pl/aie/file/issue/download/1156.pdf)

123. УДК 8 - Открытое знание, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://scipress.ru/upload/philology/fa042019.pdf</u>](https://scipress.ru/upload/philology/fa042019.pdf)

124. Day tour to Yasnaya Polyana - Rusmania, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://rusmania.com/tours/day-tours/moscow/day-tour-to-yasnaya-polyana-and-tula</u>](https://rusmania.com/tours/day-tours/moscow/day-tour-to-yasnaya-polyana-and-tula)

125. Tolstoy's Personal Library and Manuscripts, Photo and Film ...,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.unesco.org/en/memory-world/tolstoys-personal-library-and-manuscripts-photo-and-film-collection</u>](https://www.unesco.org/en/memory-world/tolstoys-personal-library-and-manuscripts-photo-and-film-collection)

126. Anna Karenina - Project Gutenberg, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1399/1399-h/1399-h.htm</u>](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1399/1399-h/1399-h.htm)

127. Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy - Russian-English dual language book
     with side-by-side English translation - Learning Russian .Net,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://learningrussian.net/anna_karenina.php</u>](https://learningrussian.net/anna_karenina.php)

128. Anna Karenina: Part 3, Chapter 28 - Marxists Internet Archive,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.marxists.org/archive/tolstoy/1877/anna-karenina/part-3-chapter-28.html</u>](https://www.marxists.org/archive/tolstoy/1877/anna-karenina/part-3-chapter-28.html)

129. Correspondence to S. A. Tolstoy and T. A. Kuzminskaya: on the
     Creative History of the Novel “Anna Karenina” - R Discovery,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://discovery.researcher.life/article/correspondence-to-s-a-tolstoy-and-t-a-kuzminskaya-on-the-creative-history-of-the-novel-anna-karenina/58de2ba6348738008579a37ee902d24c</u>](https://discovery.researcher.life/article/correspondence-to-s-a-tolstoy-and-t-a-kuzminskaya-on-the-creative-history-of-the-novel-anna-karenina/58de2ba6348738008579a37ee902d24c)

130. Correspondence to S. A. Tolstoy and T. A. Kuzminskaya: on the
     Creative History of the Novel “Anna Karenina” - ResearchGate,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/386593798_Correspondence_to_S_A_Tolstoy_and_T_A_Kuzminskaya_on_the_Creative_History_of_the_Novel_Anna_Karenina</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/386593798_Correspondence_to_S_A_Tolstoy_and_T_A_Kuzminskaya_on_the_Creative_History_of_the_Novel_Anna_Karenina)

131. "Anna Karenina" w historycznej interpretacji Mieczysława Voita -
     Dwójka - Polskie Radio, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.polskieradio.pl/8/8881/artykul/2661763,anna-karenina-w-historycznej-interpretacji-mieczyslawa-voita</u>](https://www.polskieradio.pl/8/8881/artykul/2661763,anna-karenina-w-historycznej-interpretacji-mieczyslawa-voita)

132. Anna Karenina Lew Tołstoj książka \| TaniaKsiazka.pl, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/anna-karenina</u>](https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/ksiazka/anna-karenina)

133. Anna Karenina - Tołstoj Lew \| Książka w Empik, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.empik.com/anna-karenina-tolstoj-lew,p1341955192,ksiazka-p</u>](https://www.empik.com/anna-karenina-tolstoj-lew,p1341955192,ksiazka-p)

134. Anna Karenina - Twarda - Lew Tołstoj - Książka \| Gandalf.com.pl,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.gandalf.com.pl/b/anna-karenina-z-d/</u>](https://www.gandalf.com.pl/b/anna-karenina-z-d/)

135. Czasopisma - Wojewódzka Biblioteka Publiczna im. Hieronima
     Łopacińskiego - lublin.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://wbp.lublin.pl/index.php/zbiory/czasopisma/</u>](https://wbp.lublin.pl/index.php/zbiory/czasopisma/)

136. Projekt "Digitalizacja czasopism regionalnych z lat 1887 1939" -
     Śląska Biblioteka Cyfrowa, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.sbc.org.pl/dlibra/collectiondescription/217</u>](https://www.sbc.org.pl/dlibra/collectiondescription/217)

137. Jagiellońska Biblioteka Cyfrowa \| WolneLektury.pl, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://wolnelektury.pl/biblioteki/polskie-biblioteki-cyfrowe/jbc</u>](https://wolnelektury.pl/biblioteki/polskie-biblioteki-cyfrowe/jbc)

138. Jagiellońska Biblioteka Cyfrowa - Priorytet VII Kultura w ramach
     Programu FEnIKS, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://feniks.kultura.gov.pl/historie_sukcesow/jagiellonska-biblioteka-cyfrowa/</u>](https://feniks.kultura.gov.pl/historie_sukcesow/jagiellonska-biblioteka-cyfrowa/)

139. O piśmiennictwie rosyjskim na łamach „Przeglądu Tygodniowego” w
     latach 1866–1876, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl/jspui/bitstream/11320/11117/1/S_Karpowicz_Slowikowska_O_pismiennictwie_rosyjskim.pdf</u>](https://repozytorium.uwb.edu.pl/jspui/bitstream/11320/11117/1/S_Karpowicz_Slowikowska_O_pismiennictwie_rosyjskim.pdf)

140. Lew Tołstoj - twórczość. - Pozytywizm - Bryk.pl, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.bryk.pl/wypracowania/jezyk-polski/pozytywizm/1465-lew-tolstoj-tworczosc.html</u>](https://www.bryk.pl/wypracowania/jezyk-polski/pozytywizm/1465-lew-tolstoj-tworczosc.html)

141. Notatek PL Anna Karenina Opracowanie \| PDF - Scribd, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.scribd.com/document/657713552/Notatek-Pl-Anna-Karenina-Opracowanie-1</u>](https://www.scribd.com/document/657713552/Notatek-Pl-Anna-Karenina-Opracowanie-1)

142. Wiek XIX. Rocznik TLiAM - Towarzystwo Literackie im. Adama
     Mickiewicza, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://towarzystwo-literackie.org/rocznik</u>](https://towarzystwo-literackie.org/rocznik)

143. Radosław Romaniuk: „Książki zbójeckie” Tołstoja - Teologia
     Polityczna, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://teologiapolityczna.pl/radoslaw-romaniuk-ksiazki-zbojeckie-tolstoja-1</u>](https://teologiapolityczna.pl/radoslaw-romaniuk-ksiazki-zbojeckie-tolstoja-1)

144. koń - Słownik symboli literackich - Bryk.pl, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.bryk.pl/slowniki/slownik-symboli-literackich/101599-kon</u>](https://www.bryk.pl/slowniki/slownik-symboli-literackich/101599-kon)

145. Recepcja literatury rosyjskiej na łamach "Wiadomości Literackich" -
     Agata Zawiszewska, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.zawiszewska.pl/recepcja-literatury-rosyjskiej.html</u>](https://www.zawiszewska.pl/recepcja-literatury-rosyjskiej.html)

146. Anna Karenina Theme of Religion - Shmoop, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/anna-karenina/religion-theme.html</u>](https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/anna-karenina/religion-theme.html)

147. Anna Karenina Themes \| Shmoop, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/anna-karenina/themes.html</u>](https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/anna-karenina/themes.html)

148. Anna Karenina (1948 film) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina\_(1948_film)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina_(1948_film))

149. Anna Karenina (soundtrack) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina\_(soundtrack)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina_(soundtrack))

150. Anna Karenina: Vronsky's Story - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina:\_Vronsky%27s_Story</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Karenina:_Vronsky%27s_Story)

151. Anna Karenina \| Encyclopedia.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/educational-magazines/anna-karenina</u>](https://www.encyclopedia.com/arts/educational-magazines/anna-karenina)

152. Anna Karenina \| Russian literature, 19th century, tragedy \|
     Britannica, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.britannica.com/topic/Anna-Karenina-novel</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Anna-Karenina-novel)

153. Anna Karenina: Study Guide \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/)

154. Anna Karenina: Character List \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/characters/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/characters/)

155. Anna Karenina: Full Book Analysis \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/plot-analysis/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/anna/plot-analysis/)

156. Competing Conceptions of the Good Life in Anna Karenina - Museum
     Studies Abroad, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://museumstudiesabroad.org/anna-karenina-good-life/</u>](https://museumstudiesabroad.org/anna-karenina-good-life/)

157. otwierano: stycznia 1, 1970,
     httpshttps://bachtrack.com/review-jan-2014-jba-karenina-tokyo

158. History of Censorship in Russia \| EBSCO Research Starters,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/politics-and-government/history-censorship-russia</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/politics-and-government/history-censorship-russia)

159. An Anna Is an Anna Is an Anna - Los Angeles Review of Books,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/anna-anna-anna/</u>](https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/anna-anna-anna/)

160. How Many Ways Can Something Be Untranslatable?, by Veronica
     Esposito, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://worldliteraturetoday.org/2024/july/how-many-ways-can-something-be-untranslatable-veronica-esposito</u>](https://worldliteraturetoday.org/2024/july/how-many-ways-can-something-be-untranslatable-veronica-esposito)

161. Critical Insights: Anna Karenina - Salem Press, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://salempress.com/critical-insights-anna-karenina</u>](https://salempress.com/critical-insights-anna-karenina)

162. Anna Karenina, a mixed reception \| Green Writing Room, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://greenwritingroom.com/2013/08/08/anna-karenina-a-mixed-reception/</u>](https://greenwritingroom.com/2013/08/08/anna-karenina-a-mixed-reception/)

163. Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/21548173</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/21548173)

164. Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/153.Anna_Karenina</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/153.Anna_Karenina)

165. Anna Karenina - Same-Sex attraction Showing 1-7 of 7 - Goodreads,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/1191158-same-sex-attraction</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/1191158-same-sex-attraction)

166. The Novel 100 - Book 13-Anna Karenina: MIranda's review Showing 1-8
     of 8 - Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/548113-miranda-s-review</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/548113-miranda-s-review)

167. The Reception of L.M. Montgomery's Anne of Green Gables in the
     Brazilian Context, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://journaloflmmontgomerystudies.ca/international-notes/Rodrigues-and-Ferreira/Reception-of-LMMontgomerys-Anne-of-Green-Gables-in-Brazilian-Context</u>](https://journaloflmmontgomerystudies.ca/international-notes/Rodrigues-and-Ferreira/Reception-of-LMMontgomerys-Anne-of-Green-Gables-in-Brazilian-Context)

168. Tolstoy's Anna Karenina: An Epic of 19th-Century Russian Social and
     Cultural Life, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.uvm.edu/~kmckenna/Anna_Karenina.html</u>](https://www.uvm.edu/~kmckenna/Anna_Karenina.html)

169. Resurrection (Tolstoy novel) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resurrection\_(Tolstoy_novel)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resurrection_(Tolstoy_novel))

170. Review: Anna Karenina by Leo Tolstoy - The Lit Bitch, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://thelitbitch.com/2012/07/28/review-anna-karenina-by-leo-tolstoy/</u>](https://thelitbitch.com/2012/07/28/review-anna-karenina-by-leo-tolstoy/)

171. Quotes From Leo Tolstoy's Classic 'Anna Karenina' - ThoughtCo,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.thoughtco.com/anna-karenina-quotes-738574</u>](https://www.thoughtco.com/anna-karenina-quotes-738574)

172. Why should you read the books of Leo Tolstoy? Anna Karenina and War
     an... - TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@liamscanlonwriter/video/7329549168001715489</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@liamscanlonwriter/video/7329549168001715489)

173. Leo Tolstoy, Anna Karenina, Russian Authors, Russian Travel ...,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.literarytraveler.com/articles/yasnaya-polyana-home-of-leo-tolstoy/</u>](https://www.literarytraveler.com/articles/yasnaya-polyana-home-of-leo-tolstoy/)

174. finally reading Anna Karenina - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWVi9_2JGOo</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWVi9_2JGOo)

175. BIBLIOTECA DI STUDI SLAVISTICI - Firenze University Press,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://media.fupress.com/files/pdf/24/2876/2876_19661</u>](https://media.fupress.com/files/pdf/24/2876/2876_19661)

176. Ana Karenina (Portuguese Edition) - Os Imortais da Literatura
     Universal 20 - AbeBooks, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.abebooks.com/Ana-Karenina-Portuguese-Edition-Imortais-Literatura/15153903934/bd</u>](https://www.abebooks.com/Ana-Karenina-Portuguese-Edition-Imortais-Literatura/15153903934/bd)

177. Ana Karenina - Wikipedia, la enciclopedia libre, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ana_Karenina</u>](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ana_Karenina)

178. Anna Karénine Léon Tolstoï - SensCritique, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.senscritique.com/livre/anna_karenine/196592</u>](https://www.senscritique.com/livre/anna_karenine/196592)

179. Anna Karenina - Leo Tolstoi - LovelyBooks, otwierano: lipca 25,
     2025,
     [<u>https://www.lovelybooks.de/autor/Leo-Tolstoi/Anna-Karenina-1242870838-w/</u>](https://www.lovelybooks.de/autor/Leo-Tolstoi/Anna-Karenina-1242870838-w/)

180. Anna Karenina von Lew Tolstoi \| Rezension von der Buchhexe,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://buchhexe.com/buch/anna-karenina</u>](https://buchhexe.com/buch/anna-karenina)

181. Recensioni Anna Karenina - Feltrinelli, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.lafeltrinelli.it/anna-karenina-libro-lev-tolstoj/e/9788807900006/recensioni</u>](https://www.lafeltrinelli.it/anna-karenina-libro-lev-tolstoj/e/9788807900006/recensioni)

182. Recensioni Anna Karenina - IBS, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.ibs.it/anna-karenina-libro-lev-tolstoj/e/9788806233877/recensioni</u>](https://www.ibs.it/anna-karenina-libro-lev-tolstoj/e/9788806233877/recensioni)

183. Anna Karénine – Léon Tolstoï - des livres, des livres, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://deslivresdeslivres.wordpress.com/2013/01/25/anna-karenine/</u>](https://deslivresdeslivres.wordpress.com/2013/01/25/anna-karenine/)

184. Anna Karénine - Lev Nikolaïevitch Tolstoï, Léon Tolstoï achat
     livre - Lireka, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.lireka.com/fr/pp/9782266288613-anna-karenine</u>](https://www.lireka.com/fr/pp/9782266288613-anna-karenine)

185. Anna Karénine Léon Tolstoï - critiquesLibres.com, otwierano: lipca
     25, 2025,
     [<u>https://critiqueslibres.com/i.php/vcrit/1719</u>](https://critiqueslibres.com/i.php/vcrit/1719)

186. Anna Karenina - Brochado - Fiódor Dostoiévski, Lev Tolstói - Compra
     Livros ou ebook na Fnac.pt, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.fnac.pt/Anna-Karenina-Fiodor-Dostoievski/a857908</u>](https://www.fnac.pt/Anna-Karenina-Fiodor-Dostoievski/a857908)

187. Ana Karenina: resumen y análisis para comprender el libro de
     Tolstói - Cultura Genial, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.culturagenial.com/es/ana-karenina-de-leon-tolstoi/</u>](https://www.culturagenial.com/es/ana-karenina-de-leon-tolstoi/)

188. JarirBooks-Arabic Books & More: Tolstoy: Anna Karenina
     <span dir="rtl">آنا كارنينا</span>: - Jarir Bookstore, otwierano:
     lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://jarirbooksusa.com/44411.html</u>](https://jarirbooksusa.com/44411.html)

189. <span dir="rtl">آنا كارنينا</span> (Translation of)Anna Karenina -
     ABC Books, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://abcbooksllc.com/products/9789953911236-translation-ofanna-karenina?view=quickview</u>](https://abcbooksllc.com/products/9789953911236-translation-ofanna-karenina?view=quickview)

190. Unveiling Russian Language as a Propaganda Tool - ResearchGate,
     otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/385341652_Unveiling_Russian_Language_as_a_Propaganda_Tool</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/385341652_Unveiling_Russian_Language_as_a_Propaganda_Tool)

191. La función del prólogo en la novela histórica - Biblioteca Virtual
     Miguel de Cervantes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra-visor/la-elaboracion-del-canon-en-la-literatura-espanola-del-siglo-xix-ii-coloquio-de-la-s-l-e-s-xix-barcelona-2022-de-octubre-de-1999--0/html/p0000007.htm</u>](https://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra-visor/la-elaboracion-del-canon-en-la-literatura-espanola-del-siglo-xix-ii-coloquio-de-la-s-l-e-s-xix-barcelona-2022-de-octubre-de-1999--0/html/p0000007.htm)

192. \[Leserunde\] Lew Tolstoi – Anna Karenina (1877/1878) -
     Wissenstagebuch, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
     [<u>https://www.wissenstagebuch.com/2019/07/13/leserunde-lew-tolstoi-anna-karenina-1877-1878/</u>](https://www.wissenstagebuch.com/2019/07/13/leserunde-lew-tolstoi-anna-karenina-1877-1878/)
