# The Mirrored World: A Cross-Cultural and Linguistic Analysis of Stanisław Lem's Solaris

## Introduction: The Enduring Enigma of a Sentient Ocean

Stanisław Lem's *Solaris*, first published in 1961, stands as a
monumental work of 20th-century literature, a text that transcends the
traditional boundaries of science fiction to engage in a profound
philosophical inquiry.<sup>1</sup> It has achieved a canonical status in
world literature, a distinction that few Polish works have secured with
such permanence and global reach.<sup>5</sup> The novel is built around
a central, devastating critique of what Lem termed the "myth of
cognitive universality"—the deeply ingrained human assumption that the
universe is, in principle, knowable and communicable.<sup>6</sup> It
chronicles the ultimate futility of human attempts to understand a truly
alien intelligence, presenting a stark meditation on the limits of our
knowledge, the nature of consciousness, and humanity's precarious place
in a cosmos that may be utterly indifferent to its
existence.<sup>2</sup>

This report will conduct a multi-faceted analysis of *Solaris*,
examining its complex legacy from a variety of cultural and linguistic
perspectives. It begins by deconstructing the novel's core thematic
layers, exploring its epistemological challenges, its deep
psychoanalytic dimensions, and its prescient postcolonial and gendered
critiques. The analysis then narrows its focus to the specific context
of the novel's creation and enduring impact within Poland, tracing its
journey from a product of the Polish People's Republic to a cornerstone
of the national literary canon. Following this, the report will map the
novel's global reception, comparing its interpretation and translation
across key linguistic spheres—including Russia, the Anglophone world,
France, Germany, and East Asia. A comprehensive survey of its myriad
adaptations across film, theatre, and other media will illustrate its
remarkable pliability. Finally, a concluding synthesis will reflect on
the novel's enduring and perhaps increasing relevance in the 21st
century.

## Part I: The Solarian Abyss: Core Thematic Inquiries

Before examining its journey across cultures, it is essential to
deconstruct the primary philosophical and theoretical strata of the
novel itself. *Solaris* operates on multiple levels simultaneously: as a
critique of scientific reason, a psychological horror story, a
postcolonial allegory, and a study of gendered power dynamics.

### Epistemological Frontiers: The Incommunicability of the Other

At its heart, *Solaris* is a profound critique of anthropocentric
thinking.<sup>8</sup> The central conflict is not between humans and a
hostile alien, but between the human mind and an entity that defies its
foundational categories of understanding. The scientists aboard the
Solaris station are trapped within their "Earth-bound" frameworks of
science, philosophy, and culture, which prove entirely inadequate for
comprehending the living ocean.<sup>3</sup> This failure is most
famously encapsulated in Dr. Snow's (or Snaut's) declaration: "We don't
want other worlds. We need mirrors".<sup>3</sup> The human endeavor in
space is not a search for the genuinely new, but a quest for a
reflection of humanity itself, a self-validating pilgrimage to assert
cultural and intellectual dominance over the unknown.<sup>14</sup>

This anthropocentric bias manifests in the failure of both language and
science. The novel meticulously demonstrates the "incompatibility of
language and reality" when faced with true otherness.<sup>3</sup> The
Solarists invent a complex vocabulary—"symmetriads," "asymmetriads,"
"mimoids"—to classify the ocean's elaborate structures, yet these are
merely empty signifiers, acts of imposing a familiar human order on
phenomena that operate outside any human conception of meaning or
purpose.<sup>15</sup> The entire scientific discipline of "Solaristics,"
with its century-long history and vast library, is satirized as a
monument to futility: an enormous, useless catalogue of uninterpretable
observations, a testament to the "tragedy of man's imperfect machinery
for gaining knowledge".<sup>3</sup> The ocean's behavior is
characterized by its irregularity and randomness, making it
fundamentally "unscientific" and resistant to the empirical method,
which relies on pattern and repetition.<sup>11</sup>

Lem pushes this critique further, suggesting the ocean is not merely
unknown but perhaps fundamentally *unknowable*.<sup>19</sup> It
represents a "radical otherness" that eludes human conceptualization
entirely.<sup>16</sup> The problem for the scientists is not that they
lack the right answers, but that they lack the correct

*questions*.<sup>6</sup> The ocean is an "incomputable" entity, a system
whose processes are beyond the threshold of human perception and
reason.<sup>11</sup> This idea directly challenges the bedrock of the
Western intellectual tradition, the Cartesian notion that "to name is to
know".<sup>17</sup> While this discursive, intellectual approach fails,
some interpretations suggest that an encounter with otherness remains
possible through non-conceptual, bodily emotions such as the profound
fear and dread the ocean inspires in the scientists.<sup>16</sup>

The novel establishes a direct causal link between this epistemological
failure and the psychological disintegration of the station's crew.
Their descent into madness is not a simple reaction to a supernatural
threat but a direct consequence of the collapse of their
reality-defining frameworks. The scientists arrive as confident agents
of reason, embodying an objective, scientific worldview built on the
premise that the universe is ultimately legible.<sup>14</sup> The planet
Solaris systematically dismantles this premise. Its existence outside
the realm of human purpose and language renders it "meaningless" in
their terms, invalidating their primary tool for interacting with
reality.<sup>15</sup> The station's library, a symbol of accumulated
human knowledge, is transformed into a monument to this
failure.<sup>8</sup> The ocean then inverts the scientific process
itself: instead of the observer defining the object of study, the object
begins to define the observer by externalizing their repressed,
subjective psyche in the form of the "visitors".<sup>2</sup> This
shattering of the boundary between the objective outer world and the
subjective inner world precipitates their psychological collapse.
Gibarian's suicide, Snow's paranoia, and Sartorius's aggressive denial
are all symptoms of this profound epistemological crisis.<sup>7</sup>

### The Ocean Within: Psychoanalytic Dimensions

The "phi-creatures," or "visitors," are the novel's most potent
psychological device. They are not aliens in the traditional sense but
physical manifestations of the scientists' own unconscious
minds—embodiments of their most deeply buried memories, guilt, and
trauma.<sup>2</sup> The character of Rheya is the living incarnation of
protagonist Kris Kelvin's unresolved guilt and grief over her suicide a
decade earlier.<sup>2</sup> The ocean acts as a vast, psycho-symbolic
agent, a mirror that reflects not the scientists' rational intellect but
their repressed inner chaos, forcing a confrontation with the "labyrinth
of dark passages and secret chambers" within the human
heart.<sup>21</sup>

This makes the novel a profound exploration of trauma, grief, and the
cyclical nature of the past.<sup>25</sup> Kelvin's relationship with the
new Rheya is not a chance for redemption but a painful repetition of his
past failures, a "repeater of suffering" where love and despair are
inextricably linked.<sup>8</sup> The film adaptations, particularly
Andrei Tarkovsky's, amplify this theme, transforming the narrative into
a "drama of grief and partial recovery".<sup>26</sup> From a
hauntological perspective, the visitors are specters of unresolved
trauma, refusing chronological closure and trapping the characters in a
recursive present.<sup>27</sup>

This encounter with the materialized unconscious serves to destabilize
the myth of the unified, rational human subject, a central tenet of
psychoanalytic theory.<sup>14</sup> Kelvin arrives as the epitome of the
confident, aggressive scientist, a feeling symbolized by the overtly
phallic imagery of his shuttle penetrating the planet's
atmosphere.<sup>14</sup> However, his self-assurance is quickly
shattered by the ocean's actions, reducing him to a state of profound
confusion and emotional turmoil.<sup>14</sup> The experience forces a
re-evaluation of identity itself, revealing the self not as a stable,
integrated whole but as a complex and divided entity, governed by
repressed desires and an inability to fully comprehend its own
motivations.<sup>14</sup>

### Mirrors and Conquests: Postcolonial and Posthumanist Readings

Lem explicitly frames the human endeavor on Solaris in colonial terms.
He recasts the scientists not as neutral observers but as "medieval
knights on religious pilgrimages," engaged in a quest to "assert
cultural dominance over new realms".<sup>14</sup> The human impulse in
space exploration, the novel argues, is not to understand the new but to
conquer it and replicate the familiar. This is the essence of the "we
need mirrors" argument: a desire to "expand Earth endlessly" rather than
encounter true difference.<sup>3</sup> This narrative directly engages
with the core tenets of postcolonial theory, which critiques the power
dynamics of imperialism and the colonial mindset that seeks to remake
the Other in the colonizer's own image.<sup>28</sup>

Furthermore, *Solaris* stands as a foundational text for posthumanist
thought, anticipating many of the field's central concerns by several
decades.<sup>30</sup> The novel systematically dismantles the humanist
concept of the autonomous human subject as the "measure of all
things".<sup>3</sup> The ocean represents a radically non-human form of
life and intelligence that forces a complete rethinking of these
categories.<sup>31</sup> The character of Rheya's replica introduces a
non-biological subjectivity that develops self-awareness, emotion, and a
sense of personhood, blurring the line between the authentic and the
artificial and challenging purely biological or reductionist definitions
of what it means to be human.<sup>20</sup> Kelvin's final decision to
remain on Solaris, to coexist with the unknowable ocean rather than seek
to destroy or master it, can be interpreted as a form of posthuman
ethics that moves beyond the paradigm of conquest and
control.<sup>31</sup>

### Gynesis and the Scientific Gaze: Gender and Masculinity

The narrative of *Solaris* is deeply encoded with gendered metaphors.
The ocean itself is frequently interpreted through a psychoanalytic lens
as a vast, maternal, womblike entity—a cosmic uterus.<sup>14</sup> Its
mysterious, creative, and uncontrollable power aligns with critical
theories of the "monstrous-feminine," a concept describing the
patriarchal construction of the female reproductive body as a source of
simultaneous fascination and terror.<sup>35</sup> This reading is
reinforced by the account of a pilot who witnessed the ocean form the
image of a giant newborn baby.<sup>37</sup>

In contrast, the scientific mission is framed as an exclusively
masculine quest. The all-male crew of scientists are "futuristic
knights" seeking to validate a "masculine' worldview".<sup>14</sup> The
novel's opening imagery is graphically phallic, with Kelvin's shuttle
"knifing through space" to penetrate the passive, feminized planet,
establishing a dynamic of male aggression and female
passivity.<sup>14</sup> The character of Rheya is not an independent
female subject but a "simulation of 'woman'" produced from Kelvin's male
consciousness.<sup>14</sup> She is a "stylized, reduced" version of the
original, filtered through his limited, egotistical
perspective.<sup>9</sup> Critics have noted that she embodies a "male
version of femininity," a "depressive pixie nightmare girl" whose
identity is defined by her codependence on the male protagonist,
highlighting the novel's complex engagement with gendered power
dynamics.<sup>23</sup>

This dynamic culminates in a profound inversion of the traditionally
masculine, penetrating scientific gaze. The scientists arrive with the
intent to probe, measure, and understand the feminized ocean, employing
aggressive, penetrative technologies like X-ray
bombardment.<sup>20</sup> The ocean's response completely reverses this
power structure. It does not yield data to their instruments; instead,
it reaches

*into their minds*—the most private, protected space of the rational
male subject—and extracts their deepest secrets and traumas.<sup>2</sup>
By materializing these secrets, it forces the scientists into a state of
radical vulnerability and emotional exposure. The gaze is turned inward
with terrifying force. This inversion represents the ultimate failure of
their masculine, colonial project. The attempt to dominate the
"feminine" Other results in their own psychological violation and
emasculation, transforming them from knights of reason into tormented
patients whose sanity is undone by the very entity they sought to
classify.

## Part II: The Polish Nexus: ***Solaris*** and Its Homeland

To fully grasp the novel's significance, one must situate it within its
native Polish context, where it emerged from a specific historical
moment and has since become a cultural touchstone.

### Genesis in the PRL: Publication and Initial Reception in 1960s Poland

*Solaris* was written between June 1959 and June 1960 and was first
published in 1961 by the Wydawnictwo Ministerstwa Obrony Narodowej
(Ministry of National Defense Publishing House), a state-run publisher
in the Polish People's Republic (PRL).<sup>3</sup> Its publication
marked a "przełomowym" (breakthrough) year for Lem's career and for the
status of science fiction in Poland.<sup>41</sup> The novel appeared
during the post-1956 political "thaw," a period of relative
liberalization following the end of Stalinism that allowed writers
greater creative freedom.<sup>42</sup> It was during this era that
Polish literary criticism, which had previously dismissed science
fiction as a sub-literary genre, began to engage seriously with Lem's
work.<sup>41</sup>

Initial Polish reviews were quick to recognize the novel's extraordinary
depth. Writing for the influential journal *Nowa Kultura* in 1961, the
critic Stanisław Grochowiak praised Lem as a writer who "senses the laws
of his time" and whose philosophical and intellectual imagination was
constantly deepening.<sup>44</sup> Similarly, the esteemed critic Jan
Błoński wrote in

*Życie Literackie* that *Solaris* "crosses the boundary separating
science-fiction from a literary novel," elevating a sci-fi scenario to
the level of a psychological model.<sup>39</sup> Early Polish analysis
identified the influence of French existentialism (Sartre, Camus) and
drew parallels between the moral dilemmas in

*Solaris* and those explored by other major Polish writers of the
period, such as Tadeusz Konwicki and Sławomir Mrożek, firmly placing Lem
within the mainstream of Polish intellectual life.<sup>39</sup> While
not overtly political, the novel's themes of oppressive bureaucracy, the
hubris of grand ideological projects, and the inscrutability of an
all-powerful entity resonated with the experience of life under a
communist regime. Later interpretations have often read the sentient
Ocean as a powerful allegory for the Soviet Union.<sup>13</sup>

### Canonization of a Classic: The Enduring Legacy in Polish Literature

Today, *Solaris* is an undisputed part of the Polish literary
canon.<sup>4</sup> It is widely regarded by Polish critics as the "most
mature" and "most interesting phenomenon" in all of post-war Polish
science fiction, a work that redefined the possibilities of the
genre.<sup>39</sup> Its success demonstrated that Polish science fiction
could be "ambitious, mądra, piękna językowo" (ambitious, wise, and
linguistically beautiful), opening the door for subsequent generations
of speculative fiction authors like Jacek Dukaj and Janusz A.
Zajdel.<sup>47</sup> Lem himself, in a later interview, assessed the
novel as "zupełnie przyzwoitą" (quite decent), stating that he had
succeeded in conveying his intended message and that it was one of the
first of his works he could acknowledge without shame for its complex
handling of cognitive problems.<sup>39</sup>

### From Matura to Mainstream: ***Solaris*** in the Polish Educational and Cultural Landscape

A definitive sign of the novel's canonical status is its formal
integration into the Polish national education system. In 2024,
*Solaris* was officially added to the list of supplementary readings
(*lektur uzupełniających*) for high schools and technical schools,
making it a formal part of the curriculum for students preparing for the
*Matura*, the national matriculation exam.<sup>39</sup> This decision
was preceded by years of discussion among educators who had already been
using the novel as an alternative text in their classrooms.<sup>51</sup>
Polish educational materials for students analyze the novel's blend of
genres (sci-fi, horror, mythology), its central problem of communication
with an alien consciousness, and its core themes, such as the limits of
scientific knowledge and the disjunction between technological and
ethical progress.<sup>53</sup>

The novel's cultural presence extends far beyond the classroom. It has
been the subject of multiple Polish radio adaptations, a major stage
production in Warsaw in 2009 (*Solaris. Raport*), and continues to be a
topic of vibrant discussion in popular literary forums.<sup>3</sup> The
name "Solaris" has also permeated Polish culture in various ways, most
visibly as the brand name of the major European bus manufacturer,
Solaris Bus & Coach.<sup>55</sup>

The formal inclusion of *Solaris* in the national curriculum in 2024,
despite its long-standing critical acclaim, signals a significant
evolution in the Polish educational establishment's view of science
fiction. For decades, the novel was considered a cultural touchstone but
remained an *alternative* text, positioned outside the core canon
dominated by romantic and realist literature central to Poland's
narrative of historical struggle. The 2024 decision marks a formal
recognition by the state that the philosophical and cognitive questions
posed by speculative fiction are as crucial to a modern Polish education
as the historical and social questions posed by the traditional canon.
This reflects a broadening of what constitutes "Polish literature,"
acknowledging that the nation's 20th-century legacy is defined as much
by its speculative philosophy as by its historical realism.

## Part III: A World Reflected: Global Reception and Linguistic Journeys

The journey of *Solaris* beyond Poland's borders is a complex story of
translation, adaptation, and reinterpretation, where the novel's core
themes were often filtered through the cultural and ideological lenses
of other nations.

### The Russian Soul in Space: Soviet Reception and the Tarkovsky Dialogue

The Russian translation of *Solaris* appeared shortly after its Polish
publication and quickly achieved cult status in the Soviet Union,
paradoxically aided by negative reviews from official
critics.<sup>48</sup> Lem's work was read as a potent critique of the
state-sanctioned "space-utopianism" prevalent in Soviet science fiction,
challenging the optimistic and quasi-religious "cult of cosmicism" with
a more pessimistic and complex vision.<sup>61</sup>

The novel's most significant interaction with Russian culture came
through its screen adaptations. While a faithful television play was
produced in 1968 by Boris Nirenburg, it is Andrei Tarkovsky's 1972
feature film that has indelibly shaped the global perception of the
story.<sup>3</sup> Tarkovsky fundamentally altered the novel's focus,
shifting away from Lem's epistemological questions about the limits of
science to create a deeply personal and spiritual meditation on the
human condition, memory, love, and guilt.<sup>8</sup> He famously added
a 40-minute prelude set on Earth, emphasizing Kelvin's relationships and
connection to nature—elements entirely absent from the
book.<sup>64</sup> This led to a well-documented conflict between the
two artists. Lem derided the film, famously accusing Tarkovsky of having
made

*Crime and Punishment* instead of *Solaris*.<sup>63</sup> Tarkovsky, in
turn, argued that Lem did not understand the transformative nature of
cinema and expected a mere illustration of his text.<sup>62</sup>
Despite this artistic clash, Tarkovsky's film was a cultural phenomenon
in the USSR, selling 10.5 million tickets and achieving a lasting cult
status.<sup>65</sup> It was widely seen as a Soviet response to Stanley
Kubrick's

*2001: A Space Odyssey*, but one that turned its gaze inward to the
human soul rather than outward to the cosmos.<sup>65</sup>

### Through a French Lens: The First Western Encounters

The 1964 French translation by Jean-Michel Jasienko served as the
novel's crucial gateway into Western Europe.<sup>13</sup> First
published in book form by Denoël in 1966, this version introduced Lem's
philosophical science fiction to a new audience.<sup>73</sup> However,
this translation was based on an abridged version of the Polish
original, a fact that would have significant consequences for the
novel's subsequent journey into English.<sup>3</sup> French literary
criticism immediately recognized the work's intellectual depth,
contrasting its complex, epistemological discourse with what was
perceived as the relative shallowness of contemporary American science
fiction.<sup>75</sup> The novel was praised for its innovative structure
and philosophical weight, and it continues to be held in high regard in
France, cited in compendiums like

*La Bibliothèque idéale de la SF* as a "remarkable" work.<sup>74</sup>

### Lost and Found in Translation: The Anglophone Journey

For over four decades, the Anglophone world experienced *Solaris*
through a double filter. The first English translation, published in
1970 by Walker and Company, was not made from the original Polish but
was a re-translation of the abridged French version by Joanna Kilmartin
and Steve Cox.<sup>3</sup> Lem, who was fluent in English, repeatedly
expressed his profound disappointment with this flawed version, which
inevitably shaped the novel's critical reception and popular
understanding in the English-speaking world for
generations.<sup>13</sup>

This reception was further complicated by Steven Soderbergh's 2002
Hollywood film adaptation. Like Tarkovsky, Soderbergh prioritized the
psychological drama and the central love story, largely excising Lem's
complex scientific and philosophical explorations.<sup>63</sup> Lem was
equally dismissive of this version, famously remarking that his book
"was not dedicated to erotic problems of people in outer
space".<sup>17</sup> A major turning point finally came in 2011 with the
completion of the first direct Polish-to-English translation by the
acclaimed translator Bill Johnston.<sup>13</sup> Initially released only
in audiobook and e-book formats due to rights issues, a print edition
was published in 2024, at last allowing Anglophone readers a more direct
and faithful encounter with Lem's original text.<sup>13</sup>

### Germanic Interpretations: Philosophical Rigor and Theatrical Adaptation

Lem's work found an early and appreciative audience in the
German-speaking world, with translations appearing in West Germany from
the 1960s onward.<sup>48</sup> German criticism has consistently
emphasized the novel's profound philosophical questions concerning
reality, perception, guilt, and scientific hubris, often describing it
as a "kafkaeske Novelle" (Kafkaesque novella) or a satire on the
scientific endeavor.<sup>84</sup> The reception history here was also
shaped by the Cold War, with some German readers and critics noting the
superior quality of the East German (DDR) translation by Kurt Kelm
compared to its West German counterpart.<sup>85</sup> Beyond literary
criticism, Germany has been a significant center for the novel's
adaptation into other performing arts, including a 1996 opera by Michael
Obst in Munich and a 2018 stage production in Magdeburg, demonstrating a
deep appreciation for its dramatic potential.<sup>13</sup>

### Eastern Horizons: The Resonance of ***Solaris*** in Japan and the Sinophone World

The reception of *Solaris* in East Asia offers a fascinating
counterpoint to the predominantly Western critical tradition. In the
Sinophone world, particularly during the recent "New Golden Era" of
Chinese science fiction, the novel's philosophical themes have been
interpreted through the lens of Daoism, providing new and enriching
perspectives on its exploration of the unknowable and the limits of
human cognition.<sup>48</sup>

In Japan, where the novel was first introduced in 1965, its impact has
been equally profound.<sup>86</sup> Japanese readers and critics have
been particularly struck by its critique of anthropocentrism and its
detailed depiction of an intelligence that utterly defies human
categories.<sup>87</sup> The novel's influence is evident in a 2015
opera by Dai Fujikura and, most recently, a 2024 manga adaptation by
Takehito Moriizumi.<sup>13</sup> Moriizumi has expressed a desire to
remain faithful not just to the novel's text but to what he perceives as
Lem's original vision, even preserving the story's 1960s
retro-futuristic aesthetic by depicting technologies like cassette tapes
rather than modern equivalents.<sup>89</sup> This adaptation represents
a deep cultural assimilation of Lem's work, reinterpreting it for a new
medium and a new generation.

The troubled and indirect translation history of *Solaris* serves as a
real-world meta-narrative that perfectly mirrors the novel's central
theme of imperfect communication. For decades, the primary English
version was a "copy of a copy" (Polish to French to English), a
transmission chain that inevitably introduced distortion.<sup>3</sup>
Just as the scientists on the station receive a "stylized, reduced"
version of Rheya generated from Kelvin's flawed memory, Anglophone
readers received a version of

*Solaris* filtered through multiple linguistic and cultural
sensibilities.<sup>9</sup> This created a distinct critical tradition
based on an imperfect text, much as the Solarists built their science on
imperfect observations. The arrival of Bill Johnston's direct
translation in 2011 is akin to a new scientific instrument in the
novel—it does not solve the mystery of Lem's text, but it removes a
significant layer of distortion, allowing for a more direct, though
still interpretive, encounter. The very act of the novel's global
dissemination has thus performed its central theme.

## Part IV: The Endless Metamorphosis: ***Solaris*** Across Media

The enduring power of *Solaris* is evident in its continuous adaptation
across a wide array of media. Each interpretation chooses to emphasize
different facets of the novel—some focusing on the psychological drama,
others on the philosophical mystery—demonstrating the remarkable
adaptability of Lem's original vision.

| Year | Medium | Title / Director/Creator | Country of Origin | Key Notes |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| 1963 | Radio | *Solaris* / Józef Grotowski | Poland | First known radio adaptation by Teatr Polskiego Radia.<sup>13</sup> |
| 1968 | Film (TV) | *Solaris* / Boris Nirenburg | Soviet Union | A faithful adaptation emphasizing the plot and scientific mystery over human drama.<sup>3</sup> |
| 1972 | Film | *Solaris* / Andrei Tarkovsky | Soviet Union | Critically acclaimed; shifted focus to human relationships and spirituality, a departure Lem famously criticized.<sup>13</sup> |
| 1996 | Opera | *Solaris* / Michael Obst | Germany | Premiered at the Munich Biennale, marking the novel's entry into the operatic world.<sup>13</sup> |
| 2002 | Film | *Solaris* / Steven Soderbergh | United States | Hollywood adaptation focusing on the love story; also criticized by Lem for ignoring his philosophical themes.<sup>13</sup> |
| 2007 | Radio | *Solaris* / BBC Radio 4 | United Kingdom | A two-hour dramatization for a major international broadcaster.<sup>13</sup> |
| 2009 | Theatre | *Solaris. Raport* / TR Warszawa | Poland | A significant Polish stage production, indicating continued domestic relevance.<sup>3</sup> |
| 2019 | Theatre | *Solaris* / David Greig | UK / Australia | Adaptation with a female protagonist (Kris Kelvin) and a gender-balanced crew.<sup>13</sup> |
| 2024 | Manga | *Solaris* / Takehito Moriizumi | Japan | A recent adaptation demonstrating the novel's enduring appeal and cross-cultural resonance.<sup>89</sup> |

### From Stage to Soundwave: Theatrical and Radio Dramatizations

Beyond its famous film versions, *Solaris* has a rich history of
adaptation in other media, inspiring operas, ballets, and numerous stage
plays across Europe.<sup>13</sup> The novel's claustrophobic setting and
its reliance on intense, philosophical dialogue make it particularly
well-suited for the medium of radio. Multiple radio productions have
been created, with notable versions in Poland (1963, 1975, 2010), the
United Kingdom (BBC Radio 4, 2007), and Russia (2007), each translating
the story's psychological tension into a purely auditory
experience.<sup>13</sup>

Theatrical adaptations have offered some of the most innovative
reinterpretations. The 2019 play by Scottish playwright David Greig is
particularly noteworthy for its decision to cast a woman in the lead
role of Kris Kelvin and to feature a gender-balanced crew. This choice
directly engages with and updates the novel's original masculine focus,
exploring its themes of memory, grief, and identity from a new
perspective.<sup>13</sup> Other significant stage productions in Poland
(2009), Mexico (2014), and Germany (2018) further attest to the novel's
global theatrical appeal.<sup>13</sup>

### Beyond the Novel: Cultural Allusions and Inspirations

The influence of *Solaris* permeates contemporary culture far beyond
direct adaptations. It has inspired a wide range of musical works, from
the pioneering electronic music of Isao Tomita ("The Sea Named
'Solaris'," 1977) and the Hungarian progressive rock band that took the
novel's name, to more recent albums by artists like Photek (2000) and
Daníel Bjarnason/Ben Frost (2011).<sup>13</sup> The core conceptual
framework of the novel—a mysterious, non-human entity that manifests
personal trauma—has become a recurring motif in film and television,
clearly influencing works like the 2021 Icelandic series

*Katla*.<sup>13</sup> The novel is even discussed by the characters in
Michael Haneke's unsettling 1997 film

*Funny Games*.<sup>13</sup>

This influence extends into the world of video games, with developers of
titles such as the survival horror game *Dead Space* (2008) and the
tactical RPG *Arknights* (2019) citing Lem's work as a source of
inspiration.<sup>13</sup> The name "Solaris" has also been adopted for
Poland's national synchrotron radiation facility, a fitting tribute to a
work so deeply concerned with the frontiers of science.<sup>13</sup>
However, the name's prevalence also leads to frequent confusion in
popular culture, where it is often associated with unrelated franchises,
most notably the final boss in the video game

*Sonic the Hedgehog (2006)*.<sup>92</sup>

## Conclusion: The Enduring Orbit of ***Solaris***

Stanisław Lem's *Solaris* remains a profound and unsettling masterpiece,
a work whose central theme—the fundamental limit of human cognition in
the face of the truly alien—has been continuously re-examined through
dozens of cultural, linguistic, and medial lenses. Its journey from a
philosophical novel written in the Polish People's Republic to a global
cultural phenomenon is a testament to the universal power of its core
questions. The novel's enduring strength lies in the unresolved tension
it masterfully sustains: the tension between the relentless human drive
for knowledge and meaning, embodied by the obsessive work of the
Solarists, and the universe's potential for a vast, inscrutable, and
ultimate indifference, embodied by the silent ocean.

*Solaris* forces its characters, and by extension its readers, to
confront the deeply uncomfortable possibility that our most cherished
and defining concepts—love, guilt, identity, even God—are merely human
projections, "mirrors" we hold up to a silent cosmos in a desperate
search for a reflection of ourselves.<sup>12</sup> In an age
increasingly defined by the development of artificial intelligence, the
exploration of virtual realities, and the ongoing search for
extraterrestrial life, Lem's novel is more relevant than ever. It serves
as a vital philosophical cautionary tale, reminding us that the greatest
and most challenging frontier may not be the vastness of outer space,
but the "labyrinth of dark passages and secret chambers" within the
human mind itself.<sup>2</sup> The ultimate question it poses remains as
potent and unanswered today as it was in 1961: can we ever truly hope to
understand the universe without first understanding what lies within our
own hearts?.<sup>2</sup>

#### Cytowane prace

1.  "Solaris" by Stanisław Lem: A Thought-Provoking Journey into the
    Depths of Science Fiction, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://hive.blog/hive-180164/@thomasward9/solaris-by-stanislaw-lem-a-thought-provoking-journey-into-the-depths-of-science-fiction</u>](https://hive.blog/hive-180164/@thomasward9/solaris-by-stanislaw-lem-a-thought-provoking-journey-into-the-depths-of-science-fiction)

2.  Solaris by Stanisław Lem \| Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/95558.Solaris</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/95558.Solaris)

3.  Solaris – Stanisław Lem \| \#language & literature \| Culture.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/work/solaris-stanislaw-lem</u>](https://culture.pl/en/work/solaris-stanislaw-lem)

4.  Stanisław Lem, "Solaris" \| \#literatura - Culture.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/pl/dzielo/stanislaw-lem-solaris</u>](https://culture.pl/pl/dzielo/stanislaw-lem-solaris)

5.  Solaris - Stanisław Lem, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://english.lem.pl/works/novels/solaris/2-introduction-solaris</u>](https://english.lem.pl/works/novels/solaris/2-introduction-solaris)

6.  A Philosophy of First Contact: Stanisław Lem and the Myth of
    Cognitive Universality \| Pro-Fil, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://journals.phil.muni.cz/profil/article/view/20441</u>](https://journals.phil.muni.cz/profil/article/view/20441)

7.  Solaris by Stanisław Lem \| EBSCO Research Starters, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/solaris-stanislaw-lem</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/solaris-stanislaw-lem)

8.  Theme in Stanislaw Lem's Solaris and Andrei Tarkovksy's Film
    Adaptation – Writing the World 2021 - Open Books, otwierano: lipca
    27, 2025,
    [<u>https://openbooks.library.umass.edu/writing-the-world-2021/chapter/theme-in-stanislaw-lems-solaris-and-andrei-tarkovksys-film-adaptation/</u>](https://openbooks.library.umass.edu/writing-the-world-2021/chapter/theme-in-stanislaw-lems-solaris-and-andrei-tarkovksys-film-adaptation/)

9.  Solaris Themes \| LitCharts, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/solaris/themes</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/solaris/themes)

10. Stanislaw Lem's Solaris \| Skulls in the Stars, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://skullsinthestars.com/2016/10/04/stanislaw-lems-solaris/</u>](https://skullsinthestars.com/2016/10/04/stanislaw-lems-solaris/)

11. Unfathomable Thought in Science and Fiction: The Cognitive
    Nonconscious and the Incomputable in Stanisław Lem's Solaris \|
    Institute of the Cosmos, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://cosmos.art/cosmic-bulletin/2020/unfathomable-thought-in-science-and-fiction-the-cognitive-nonconscious-and-the-incomputable-in-stanislaw-lem-s-solaris</u>](https://cosmos.art/cosmic-bulletin/2020/unfathomable-thought-in-science-and-fiction-the-cognitive-nonconscious-and-the-incomputable-in-stanislaw-lem-s-solaris)

12. Patron Pick – Solaris (1972) - PopCult Reviews, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://popcult.blog/2022/07/31/patron-pick-solaris-1972/</u>](https://popcult.blog/2022/07/31/patron-pick-solaris-1972/)

13. Solaris (novel) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris\_(novel)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_(novel))

14. Elyce Rae Helford- "We are only seeking Man": Gender,
    Psychoanalysis, and Stanislaw Lem's Solaris - DePauw University,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.depauw.edu/sfs/backissues/57/helford57art.htm</u>](https://www.depauw.edu/sfs/backissues/57/helford57art.htm)

15. Manfred Geier- Stanislaw Lem's Fantastic Ocean: Toward a Semantic
    Interpretation of Solaris1 - DePauw University, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.depauw.edu/site/sfs/backissues/57/geier57art.htm</u>](https://www.depauw.edu/site/sfs/backissues/57/geier57art.htm)

16. (PDF) Revisiting Solaris: Encountering Otherness and the Limits of
    Representation, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357563876_Revisiting_Solaris_Encountering_Otherness_and_the_Limits_of_Representation</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357563876_Revisiting_Solaris_Encountering_Otherness_and_the_Limits_of_Representation)

17. My review of Solaris, by Stanislaw Lem : r/printSF - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/printSF/comments/12932gh/my_review_of_solaris_by_stanislaw_lem/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/printSF/comments/12932gh/my_review_of_solaris_by_stanislaw_lem/)

18. What does the silent planet tell us? The analysis of selected
    philosophical themes found in Stanisław Lem's Solaris - Journals
    University of Lodz, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://czasopisma.uni.lodz.pl/polonica/article/download/8499/9527/25370</u>](https://czasopisma.uni.lodz.pl/polonica/article/download/8499/9527/25370)

19. Revisiting Solaris: Encountering Otherness and the Limits of
    Representation \| Pro-Fil, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://journals.phil.muni.cz/profil/article/view/20442</u>](https://journals.phil.muni.cz/profil/article/view/20442)

20. Solaris: Analysis of Major Characters \| EBSCO Research Starters,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/solaris-analysis-major-characters</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/literature-and-writing/solaris-analysis-major-characters)

21. 1001 Book Review: Solaris Stanislaw Lem \| The Reader's Room,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://thereadersroom.org/2016/03/11/1001-book-review-solaris-stanislaw-lem/</u>](https://thereadersroom.org/2016/03/11/1001-book-review-solaris-stanislaw-lem/)

22. Solaris by Stanislaw Lem – Seriously Seeking Psychological Solutions
    \| Joe's Geek Fest, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://joesgeekfest.wordpress.com/2013/11/05/solaris-by-stanislaw-lem-seriously-seeking-psychological-solutions/</u>](https://joesgeekfest.wordpress.com/2013/11/05/solaris-by-stanislaw-lem-seriously-seeking-psychological-solutions/)

23. June Read - Solaris by Stanislaw Lem - Spoilers : r/printSF -
    Reddit, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/printSF/comments/h9k6uo/june_read_solaris_by_stanislaw_lem_spoilers/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/printSF/comments/h9k6uo/june_read_solaris_by_stanislaw_lem_spoilers/)

24. Review: Solaris by Stanisław Lem - Thoughts on Papyrus, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://thoughtsonpapyrus.com/2019/07/04/review-solaris-by-stanislaw-lem/</u>](https://thoughtsonpapyrus.com/2019/07/04/review-solaris-by-stanislaw-lem/)

25. A Forgotten Masterpiece: Why Solaris (1972) Remains One of Sci-Fi's
    Deepest Films - Fear Planet, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://fearplanet.net/2024/10/06/a-forgotten-masterpiece-solaris/</u>](https://fearplanet.net/2024/10/06/a-forgotten-masterpiece-solaris/)

26. Solaris: Inner Space \| Current \| The Criterion Collection,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.criterion.com/current/posts/239-solaris-inner-space</u>](https://www.criterion.com/current/posts/239-solaris-inner-space)

27. Hauntology and Solaris: The Oceanic Unconscious and the Specters of
    Postmodernity, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390492855_Hauntology_and_Solaris_The_Oceanic_Unconscious_and_the_Specters_of_Postmodernity</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390492855_Hauntology_and_Solaris_The_Oceanic_Unconscious_and_the_Specters_of_Postmodernity)

28. Postcolonial Theory \| EBSCO Research Starters, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/political-science/postcolonial-theory</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/political-science/postcolonial-theory)

29. What Is Postcolonial Theory? - Bible Odyssey, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.bibleodyssey.org/video-gallery/what-is-postcolonial-theory/</u>](https://www.bibleodyssey.org/video-gallery/what-is-postcolonial-theory/)

30. Posthumanism in Late Soviet Science Fiction \| PDF - Scribd,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.scribd.com/document/624295390/Posthumanism-in-Late-Soviet-Science-Fiction</u>](https://www.scribd.com/document/624295390/Posthumanism-in-Late-Soviet-Science-Fiction)

31. Posthumanism in late Soviet science fiction: - Leiden University
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://studenttheses.universiteitleiden.nl/access/item%3A2603862/view</u>](https://studenttheses.universiteitleiden.nl/access/item%3A2603862/view)

32. Science (Fiction) and Posthuman Ethics: Redefining the Human -
    ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263722582_Science_Fiction_and_Posthuman_Ethics_Redefining_the_Human</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263722582_Science_Fiction_and_Posthuman_Ethics_Redefining_the_Human)

33. Posthumanism 101: Non-Fiction and Fiction \| The Dark Fantastic,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://socialecologies.wordpress.com/2014/11/07/posthumanism-101-non-fiction-and-fiction/</u>](https://socialecologies.wordpress.com/2014/11/07/posthumanism-101-non-fiction-and-fiction/)

34. Philosophy of Mind and Body in Andrei Tarkovsky's Solaris \| Film
    ..., otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/abs/10.3366/film.2016.0020</u>](https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/abs/10.3366/film.2016.0020)

35. The Monstrous-Feminine: Film, Feminism, Psychoanalysis - 2nd
    Edition - - Routledge, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.routledge.com/The-Monstrous-Feminine-Film-Feminism-Psychoanalysis/Creed/p/book/9780367209452</u>](https://www.routledge.com/The-Monstrous-Feminine-Film-Feminism-Psychoanalysis/Creed/p/book/9780367209452)

36. The Monstrous-Feminine: Film, Feminism, Psychoanalysis (Popular
    Fictions Series) - ieas-szeged.hu, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://ieas-szeged.hu/downtherabbithole/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Barbara-Creed-The-Monstrous-Feminine-2007.pdf</u>](https://ieas-szeged.hu/downtherabbithole/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Barbara-Creed-The-Monstrous-Feminine-2007.pdf)

37. A Psychosexual Perspective on Solaris (1972) : r/TrueFilm - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/TrueFilm/comments/1io48j4/a_psychosexual_perspective_on_solaris_1972/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/TrueFilm/comments/1io48j4/a_psychosexual_perspective_on_solaris_1972/)

38. Solaris (1972 film) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris\_(1972_film)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_(1972_film))

39. Solaris (powieść) – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano: lipca
    27, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris\_(powie%C5%9B%C4%87)</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_(powie%C5%9B%C4%87))

40. Rok 1961: Ukazuje się "Solaris" Stanisława Lema - Książki -
    Onet.Kultura, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://kultura.onet.pl/ksiazki/rok-1961-ukazuje-sie-solaris-stanislawa-lema/1f9gpr8</u>](https://kultura.onet.pl/ksiazki/rok-1961-ukazuje-sie-solaris-stanislawa-lema/1f9gpr8)

41. science-fiction, fantasy and horror web periodic - Fahrenheit,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.fahrenheit.net.pl/archiwum/f24/19.html</u>](https://www.fahrenheit.net.pl/archiwum/f24/19.html)

42. Polish speculative fiction - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polish_speculative_fiction</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polish_speculative_fiction)

43. Stanisław Lem \| EBSCO Research Starters, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/biography/stanislaw-lem</u>](https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/biography/stanislaw-lem)

44. Solaris - Stanisław Lem, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://solaris.lem.pl/ksiazki/beletrystyka/solaris</u>](https://solaris.lem.pl/ksiazki/beletrystyka/solaris)

45. Stanisław Lem - Biography \| Artist - Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca
    27, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/artist/stanislaw-lem</u>](https://culture.pl/en/artist/stanislaw-lem)

46. Solaris Symbols & Motifs - SuperSummary, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.supersummary.com/solaris/symbols-and-motifs/</u>](https://www.supersummary.com/solaris/symbols-and-motifs/)

47. Najlepsze polskie książki science fiction – odkryj fascynujące
    tytuły - Tania Książka, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/najlepsze-polskie-ksiazki-science-fiction-odkryj-fascynujace-tytuly-a-1444.html</u>](https://www.taniaksiazka.pl/najlepsze-polskie-ksiazki-science-fiction-odkryj-fascynujace-tytuly-a-1444.html)

48. Solaris and the Dao: The Reception of Stanislaw Lem's Novel in the
    Sinophone World, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/354606289_Solaris_and_the_Dao_The_Reception_of_Stanislaw_Lem's_Novel_in_the_Sinophone_World</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/354606289_Solaris_and_the_Dao_The_Reception_of_Stanislaw_Lem's_Novel_in_the_Sinophone_World)

49. Lista lektur szkolnych 2024/2025. Liceum i technikum - Lustro
    Biblioteki, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://lustrobiblioteki.pl/2024/06/lista-lektur-szkolnych-w-roku-szkolnym-2024-2025-licea-i-technika/</u>](https://lustrobiblioteki.pl/2024/06/lista-lektur-szkolnych-w-roku-szkolnym-2024-2025-licea-i-technika/)

50. Lista lektur LICEUM i TECHNIKUM – poziom podstawowy – 2025/2026,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.listalektur.pl/lista-lektur-liceum-klasy-1-2-3-poziom-podstawowy/</u>](https://www.listalektur.pl/lista-lektur-liceum-klasy-1-2-3-poziom-podstawowy/)

51. "Solaris" Stanisława Lema - lektura szkolna inna niż wszystkie.
    Spoiler Alert! - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i4excogef94</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i4excogef94)

52. Lista lektur - Ekola, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.ekola.edu.pl/gimnazjum/2018-2019/lista-lektur</u>](http://www.ekola.edu.pl/gimnazjum/2018-2019/lista-lektur)

53. Kącik Maturzysty: 68. Lektury. Stanisław Lem, Solaris - Co słychać w
    WIPuŚ?, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>http://blogwib.blogspot.com/2018/02/kacik-maturzysty-68-lektury-stanisaw.html</u>](http://blogwib.blogspot.com/2018/02/kacik-maturzysty-68-lektury-stanisaw.html)

54. Solaris - Stanisław Lem \| Książka w Lubimyczytac.pl - Opinie,
    oceny, ceny, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/133717/solaris</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/133717/solaris)

55. Elektryczne Solarisy będą wozić dzieci do szkoły w kolejnych pięciu
    gminach w Polsce, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.solarisbus.com/pl/biuro-prasowe-solaris-bus-coach-sp-z-o-o/elektryczne-solarisy-beda-wozic-dzieci-do-szkoly-w-kolejnych-pieciu-gminach-w-polsce-1671</u>](https://www.solarisbus.com/pl/biuro-prasowe-solaris-bus-coach-sp-z-o-o/elektryczne-solarisy-beda-wozic-dzieci-do-szkoly-w-kolejnych-pieciu-gminach-w-polsce-1671)

56. Solaris dostarczy pierwszy w Polsce elektryczny autobus szkolny -
    ORPA, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://orpa.pl/solaris-dostarczy-pierwszy-w-polsce-elektryczny-autobus-szkolny/</u>](https://orpa.pl/solaris-dostarczy-pierwszy-w-polsce-elektryczny-autobus-szkolny/)

57. Solaris dostarcza elektryczne autobusy szkolne do polskich gmin -
    ŚwiatOZE.pl, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://swiatoze.pl/solaris-dostarcza-elektryczne-autobusy-szkolne-do-polskich-gmin/</u>](https://swiatoze.pl/solaris-dostarcza-elektryczne-autobusy-szkolne-do-polskich-gmin/)

58. Solaris dostarczy pierwszy w Polsce elektryczny autobus szkolny -
    Obserwator Gospodarczy, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://obserwatorgospodarczy.pl/2020/06/27/solaris-dostarczy-pierwszy-w-polsce-elektryczny-autobus-szkolny/</u>](https://obserwatorgospodarczy.pl/2020/06/27/solaris-dostarczy-pierwszy-w-polsce-elektryczny-autobus-szkolny/)

59. Solaris dostarcza elektryczne autobusy szkolne polskim gminom -
    ORPA - Obserwatorium Rynku Paliw Alternatywnych, otwierano: lipca
    27, 2025,
    [<u>https://orpa.pl/solaris-dostarcza-elektryczne-autobusy-szkolne-polskim-gminom/</u>](https://orpa.pl/solaris-dostarcza-elektryczne-autobusy-szkolne-polskim-gminom/)

60. Solaris Bus, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.solarisbus.com/</u>](https://www.solarisbus.com/)

61. Science Fiction Studies - DePauw University, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.depauw.edu/sfs/notes/notes100/notes100.html</u>](https://www.depauw.edu/sfs/notes/notes100/notes100.html)

62. Intimately Alien: Conflicting Ideologies in Solyaris (1968) and
    Solaris (1972), otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://brightlightsfilm.com/intimately-alien-conflicting-ideologies-in-solyaris-1968-and-solaris-1972/</u>](https://brightlightsfilm.com/intimately-alien-conflicting-ideologies-in-solyaris-1968-and-solaris-1972/)

63. The Three Worlds of Solaris: A Reflective Comparison - ImaginAtlas,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://imaginatlas.ca/the-three-worlds-of-solaris-a-reflective-comparison/</u>](https://imaginatlas.ca/the-three-worlds-of-solaris-a-reflective-comparison/)

64. Solaris, part 2 – Lem vs. Tarkovsky, the technological/scientific
    approach vs. the anthropocentric/humanist approach - Mística
    Virtual, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>http://misticavirtual.com/solaris-part-2-lem-vs-tarkovsky-the-technologicalscientific-approach-vs-the-anthropocentrichumanist-approach</u>](http://misticavirtual.com/solaris-part-2-lem-vs-tarkovsky-the-technologicalscientific-approach-vs-the-anthropocentrichumanist-approach)

65. Andrei Tarkovsky \| Solaris - Marie H. Sirois, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://mhsirois.com/andrei-tarkovsky-solaris/</u>](https://mhsirois.com/andrei-tarkovsky-solaris/)

66. otwierano: stycznia 1, 1970,
    [<u>https.imaginatlas.ca/the-three-worlds-of-solaris-a-reflective-comparison/</u>](http://docs.google.com/https.imaginatlas.ca/the-three-worlds-of-solaris-a-reflective-comparison/)

67. 『惑星ソラリス』原作のスタニスラフ・レム『ソラリス』の詳しいあらすじと、映画と原作の違い,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://ameblo.jp/48akbskenmbhktjkt/entry-12512987155.html</u>](https://ameblo.jp/48akbskenmbhktjkt/entry-12512987155.html)

68. Tarkovsky's Solaris (1972)- A Search Through Our Unknown. - JFR
    Blog, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://lewislitjournal.wordpress.com/2019/09/29/tarkovskys-solaris-1972-a-search-through-our-unknown/</u>](https://lewislitjournal.wordpress.com/2019/09/29/tarkovskys-solaris-1972-a-search-through-our-unknown/)

69. Addressing Stanisław Lem's comments about Andrei/y Tarkovsky's
    adaptation of his 'Solaris' novel: What did he really mean by
    'Tarkovsky made Crime and Punishment rather than Solaris'? :
    r/TrueFilm - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/TrueFilm/comments/19b9syp/addressing_stanis%C5%82aw_lems_comments_about_andreiy/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/TrueFilm/comments/19b9syp/addressing_stanis%C5%82aw_lems_comments_about_andreiy/)

70. \[ Nostalghia.com \| The Topics :: Tarkovsky on Solaris \],
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>http://nostalghia.com/TheTopics/On_Solaris.html</u>](http://nostalghia.com/TheTopics/On_Solaris.html)

71. Solaris movie review & film summary (1972) - Roger Ebert, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-solaris-1972</u>](https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-solaris-1972)

72. Solaris and 2001: Opposites in Disguise - TrueFilm - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/TrueFilm/comments/1lmuu7s/solaris_and_2001_opposites_in_disguise/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/TrueFilm/comments/1lmuu7s/solaris_and_2001_opposites_in_disguise/)

73. Critique : « Solaris », de Stanislas Lem - LÉGENDE, otwierano: lipca
    27, 2025,
    [<u>https://revuelegende.wordpress.com/2024/06/12/critique-solaris-de-stanislas-lem/</u>](https://revuelegende.wordpress.com/2024/06/12/critique-solaris-de-stanislas-lem/)

74. Solaris (roman) - Wikipédia, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris\_(roman)</u>](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_(roman))

75. Solaris de Stanislas Lem : la modélisation mathématique et la
    récursivité dans la figure de la communication impossible - Érudit,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.erudit.org/fr/revues/tce/2002-n68-tce607/008249ar.pdf</u>](https://www.erudit.org/fr/revues/tce/2002-n68-tce607/008249ar.pdf)

76. Thoughts on "Solaris"! : r/scifi - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/scifi/comments/17w4vwx/thoughts_on_solaris/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/scifi/comments/17w4vwx/thoughts_on_solaris/)

77. Stanislaw Lem: Solaris (1961) \| Common Errors in English Usage and
    More \| Washington State University, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://brians.wsu.edu/2016/10/12/study-guide-for-stanislaw-lem-solaris-1961/</u>](https://brians.wsu.edu/2016/10/12/study-guide-for-stanislaw-lem-solaris-1961/)

78. Would I like Solaris even though I don't like "old" books? :
    r/printSF - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/printSF/comments/1j3v195/would_i_like_solaris_even_though_i_dont_like_old/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/printSF/comments/1j3v195/would_i_like_solaris_even_though_i_dont_like_old/)

79. Solaris: A Comparison \| Aesthetics Of The Mind - WordPress.com,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://aestheticsofthemind.wordpress.com/2011/07/25/solaris-a-comparison/</u>](https://aestheticsofthemind.wordpress.com/2011/07/25/solaris-a-comparison/)

80. imaginatlas.ca, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://imaginatlas.ca/the-three-worlds-of-solaris-a-reflective-comparison/#:~:text=In%20response%20to%20Soderbergh's%20version,being%20that%20evades%20ontology%20itself.</u>](https://imaginatlas.ca/the-three-worlds-of-solaris-a-reflective-comparison/#:~:text=In%20response%20to%20Soderbergh's%20version,being%20that%20evades%20ontology%20itself.)

81. Solaris. - languagehat.com, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://languagehat.com/solaris/</u>](https://languagehat.com/solaris/)

82. Solaris - Stanisław Lem, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://english.lem.pl/works/novels/solaris</u>](https://english.lem.pl/works/novels/solaris)

83. Solarisand the Dao1: The Reception of Stanislaw Lem's Novel in the
    Sinophone World - Biblioteka Nauki, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://bibliotekanauki.pl/articles/1533144.pdf</u>](https://bibliotekanauki.pl/articles/1533144.pdf)

84. Solaris(Deutsche Version) von Stanisław Lem —
    Gratis-Zusammenfassung - getAbstract, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.getabstract.com/de/zusammenfassung/solaris/12606</u>](https://www.getabstract.com/de/zusammenfassung/solaris/12606)

85. Stanislaw Lem: Solaris - Phantastik-Couch.de, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.phantastik-couch.de/titel/5-solaris/</u>](https://www.phantastik-couch.de/titel/5-solaris/)

86. 著者インタビュー：忍澤勉先生 - sf-fantasy.com, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>http://www.sf-fantasy.com/magazine/interview/121102.shtml</u>](http://www.sf-fantasy.com/magazine/interview/121102.shtml)

87. 『ソラリス』｜ネタバレありの感想・レビュー - 読書メーター,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://bookmeter.com/books/518528?review_filter=netabare</u>](https://bookmeter.com/books/518528?review_filter=netabare)

88. 『ソラリス』｜感想・レビュー - 読書メーター, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://bookmeter.com/books/518528</u>](https://bookmeter.com/books/518528)

89. \[Interview\] Manga Artist Undertakes the Monumental Task of
    Adapting the "Greatest SF Novel of the 20th Century" into Manga: "I
    Want to Illustrate the Images in the Author's Mind" \| Japan Anime
    News powered by ORICON NEWS, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://us.oricon-group.com/news/1439/</u>](https://us.oricon-group.com/news/1439/)

90. BBC: Solaris - YouTube, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wnAoM_xRUuI</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wnAoM_xRUuI)

91. Solaris A new play by David Greig Adapted from Stanislaw Lem's novel
    \| Canadian Stage, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://my.canadianstage.com/overview/8005</u>](https://my.canadianstage.com/overview/8005)

92. Solaris Solarisremake Acg - Discover & Share GIFs - Tenor,
    otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://tenor.com/view/solaris-solarisremake-acg-a-core-game-remake-a-core-game-06-gif-3898824631646088085</u>](https://tenor.com/view/solaris-solarisremake-acg-a-core-game-remake-a-core-game-06-gif-3898824631646088085)

93. Heavy using the Chaos Emeralds from Sonic 2006 game to fight Solaris
    is a cool image mashup : r/tf2 - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/tf2/comments/1m3jx19/heavy_using_the_chaos_emeralds_from_sonic_2006/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/tf2/comments/1m3jx19/heavy_using_the_chaos_emeralds_from_sonic_2006/)

94. Explore the Best Solaris Art \| DeviantArt, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.deviantart.com/tag/solaris?page=4</u>](https://www.deviantart.com/tag/solaris?page=4)

95. Explore the Best Solaris Art \| DeviantArt, otwierano: lipca 27,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.deviantart.com/tag/solaris</u>](https://www.deviantart.com/tag/solaris)

96. Solaris the Hedgehog by MaesterSolaris.deviantart.com on
    @DeviantArt - Pinterest, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://uk.pinterest.com/pin/595882594417624908/</u>](https://uk.pinterest.com/pin/595882594417624908/)

97. Solaris by Stanislaw Lem, Paperback \| Barnes & Noble®, otwierano:
    lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/solaris-stanislaw-lem/1100829751</u>](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/solaris-stanislaw-lem/1100829751)

98. Solaris \| Science Book a Day, otwierano: lipca 27, 2025,
    [<u>https://sciencebookaday.com/2015/10/21/solaris/</u>](https://sciencebookaday.com/2015/10/21/solaris/)
