# There and Back Again: A Hobbit's Journey Through World Cultures, from an Oxford Study to a Polish Bookshelf

## Part I: The Unexpected Author and His Unexpected Journey

To understand *The Hobbit*, one must first understand its author, not as
a whimsical teller of bedtime stories, but as a formidable scholar whose
life's work and personal history are woven into every page of his
creation. The journey of Bilbo Baggins is, in many ways, an echo of the
intellectual and emotional journey of John Ronald Reuel Tolkien. The
book did not spring fully formed from a moment of idle fancy; it was the
culmination of decades of academic study, personal tragedy, and a
profound love for the ancient stories of Northern Europe. It is a work
born from the "leaf-mould of the mind," a rich soil of myth, language,
and experience that gave its fantasy an unprecedented sense of
reality.<sup>1</sup>

### From Philology to Fantasy: The Mind of J.R.R. Tolkien

Before he was the celebrated author of *The Hobbit* and *The Lord of the
Rings*, J.R.R. Tolkien was a distinguished academic at the University of
Oxford, twice holding the position of Professor of Anglo-Saxon (Old
English).<sup>3</sup> His professional life revolved around
philology—the intricate study of language through historical
texts.<sup>2</sup> This was not a dry, dusty pursuit but a passionate
exploration of the very roots of story and culture. Through his work,
Tolkien became an expert in the myths, sagas, and languages that shaped
the modern world, from Norse mythology to Old English literature like

*Beowulf*.<sup>2</sup>

This academic foundation is not merely a backdrop to his fiction; it is
the source from which his entire fictional universe, or legendarium,
flows. Long before Bilbo Baggins ever left his comfortable hobbit-hole,
Tolkien was meticulously crafting Elven languages and writing the
foundational myths that would later be published as *The
Silmarillion*.<sup>4</sup> This process was not one of pure invention
but rather an act of scholarly and creative reconstruction. Tolkien felt
that England, unlike other European nations, had lost its native
mythology after the Norman Conquest of 1066. He sought to create a
"mythology for England" that would feel authentic and deeply rooted in
the linguistic and cultural soil of the land he loved.<sup>2</sup>

This is why his world feels so real. The very name "Middle-earth" was
not a fanciful creation but a direct borrowing from the Old English word
"Middangeard" (and its Middle English successor, "middelerde"), which
described the everyday world of mortals situated between heaven above
and hell below.<sup>3</sup> Many of the names of the dwarves and Gandalf
are drawn directly from the

*Völuspá*, a section of the Old Norse Poetic Edda.<sup>6</sup> By using
his philological tools, Tolkien built his world from the authentic,
ancient materials of European heritage. He was not just making up a
story; he was attempting to recover a lost world of ancient beauty,
giving his fantasy a weight and historical depth that set it apart from
anything that had come before.<sup>3</sup>

### "In a Hole in the Ground...": The Spark of Creation

The origin of *The Hobbit* has become a legend in its own right, a
perfect example of an unexpected journey. One summer day in the early
1930s, while performing the tedious academic chore of marking student
examination papers, Tolkien came across a page that a student had
mercifully left blank.<sup>4</sup> On a sudden, inexplicable impulse, he
wrote the words that would change the course of modern literature: "In a
hole in the ground there lived a hobbit".<sup>4</sup>

This single sentence, according to Tolkien's authorized biographer
Humphrey Carpenter, was the seed from which the entire story
grew.<sup>8</sup> Tolkien himself later reflected, "Names always
generate a story in my mind. Eventually I thought I'd better find out
what hobbits were like".<sup>1</sup> The story developed gradually over
the next few years, often told in episodes as a bedtime story for his
own children.<sup>6</sup> By the end of 1932, he had a completed
manuscript which he shared with a small circle of friends, including his
fellow Oxford academic and author, C.S. Lewis.<sup>4</sup>

The path to publication was as serendipitous as the book's creation. The
manuscript came to the attention of Susan Dagnall, an employee at the
publishing house George Allen & Unwin, through one of Tolkien's former
students, Elaine Griffiths.<sup>4</sup> Intrigued, Dagnall encouraged
Tolkien to finish the story. The final decision to publish, however,
famously rested on the opinion of the publisher's ten-year-old son,
Rayner Unwin. The boy's enthusiastic review, for which he was paid a
single shilling, convinced his father to take a chance on the book. As
Rayner later remarked, "It was the best shilling the firm ever
spent".<sup>7</sup>

While the "blank page" story suggests a magical flash of inspiration,
the reality is more complex and speaks to the nature of creativity
itself. The word "hobbit" was not plucked from thin air. Scholarly
analysis by Michael Livingston suggests it was likely a neologism—a
newly coined word—that bubbled up from Tolkien's subconscious, which was
saturated with rare and archaic English and Welsh words. One likely
influence is the Welsh term "hobbet," a unit of measure for grain, which
connects to the hobbits' agrarian, rustic nature.<sup>1</sup> Tolkien
himself, while claiming he didn't remember any specific source,
acknowledged that "buried childhood memories might suddenly rise to the
surface".<sup>1</sup> This spark of creation, therefore, was not a
lightning strike in an empty field. It was a spark that landed on a vast
and fertile landscape of linguistic knowledge and mythological
storytelling that Tolkien had been cultivating for nearly twenty years.
His work on the Elven languages and the grand tales of

*The Silmarillion*, such as *The Fall of Gondolin*, had prepared the
ground.<sup>3</sup> The story of the hobbit began as a separate tale but
was eventually, and masterfully, woven into the fabric of this much
larger world. This illustrates a profound truth for any young writer or
artist: creative breakthroughs that feel spontaneous are often the
result of long, patient, and passionate preparation.

### Echoes of War, Whispers of Myth

Beneath the charming surface of a children's adventure story lies a
deeper, darker layer of experience that profoundly shaped Tolkien's
imagination: the First World War. As meticulously documented by
historian John Garth in his book *Tolkien and the Great War*, Tolkien's
service as a signals officer in the Battle of the Somme in 1916 was one
of the most horrific and defining periods of his life.<sup>12</sup> The
industrial slaughter he witnessed and the personal losses he endured
were immense. As he later wrote, "By 1918 all but one of my close
friends were dead".<sup>12</sup>

Garth argues convincingly that this foundation of tragic experience is
"the key to Middle-earth's enduring power".<sup>12</sup> Tolkien's
creative work was not an escape from the grim reality of the 20th
century, but a way to process and transform it. The desolate, poisoned
landscape before the Lonely Mountain, the Desolation of Smaug, carries
undeniable echoes of the cratered, lifeless battlefields of the Western
Front.<sup>6</sup> The spiders of Mirkwood and the evil of the
Necromancer can be seen as mythological transmutations of the senseless,
consuming evil of modern warfare.

However, Tolkien did not surrender to the disillusionment and cynicism
that characterized much of the literature that emerged from the Great
War. Instead, he filtered his traumatic experiences through his deep
knowledge of ancient heroic sagas from Norse and Old English traditions.
This allowed him to confront themes of heroism, sacrifice, and the
struggle against overwhelming darkness without losing a sense of hope
and enchantment. While many of his contemporaries saw only the death of
the old world, Tolkien used its myths to keep "enchantment alive,"
reshaping an entire literary tradition into a form that could speak to
the anxieties of his generation and those to come.<sup>12</sup>

## Part II: A Journey Through Middle-earth's Core Themes

*The Hobbit* is far more than a simple adventure tale of dwarves and
dragons. It is a profound exploration of some of the most fundamental
aspects of the human experience: personal growth, the corrupting
influence of greed, and the deep, abiding importance of home. These
themes are woven so skillfully into the narrative that they resonate
with readers of all ages, making Bilbo's journey a timeless map for
navigating the challenges of one's own life.

### More Than Just a Baggins: The Growth of a Reluctant Hero

At its heart, *The Hobbit* is a classic example of a *Bildungsroman*—a
German term for a novel that focuses on the psychological and moral
growth of its protagonist from youth to adulthood.<sup>15</sup> What
makes Tolkien's story unique is that its hero, Bilbo Baggins, is already
a respectable, middle-aged hobbit when his adventure begins. His "coming
of age" is not about growing older, but about awakening to the hidden
depths of his own character.

When we first meet Bilbo, he is the very picture of complacency. He
loves his comfortable hobbit-hole, his predictable meals, and the
respect of his neighbors.<sup>17</sup> The mere thought of an adventure
is enough to make him feel ill. His personality is presented as an
internal conflict between his two family lines: the respectable,
comfort-loving "Baggins" side from his father, and the latently
adventurous "Took" side from his mother.<sup>17</sup> Initially, the
Baggins side is in complete control.

The unexpected journey with Gandalf and the dwarves forces Bilbo to
confront a world far outside his experience, and in doing so, he
discovers a competence, wisdom, and courage he never knew he
possessed.<sup>4</sup> This transformation is not instantaneous but is
built through a series of crucial tests. When he outwits the three
trolls through cleverness rather than force, he takes his first
step.<sup>6</sup> In the darkness beneath the Misty Mountains, his
riddle-game with Gollum is a battle of wits that he wins, securing not
only his escape but also the magic ring that will become so central to
his story.<sup>6</sup> In Mirkwood, he single-handedly rescues the
dwarves from giant spiders, giving his sword its name, Sting, and taking
a major step toward becoming a true hero.<sup>6</sup> Each success
builds his confidence and resourcefulness, transforming him from the
timid hobbit who fainted at the prospect of adventure into the brave
individual who dares to face the dragon Smaug alone.<sup>17</sup>

This portrayal of heroism was radical for its time. Unlike many fantasy
heroes who are born to greatness or possess superhuman strength, Bilbo
is emphatically ordinary. He is small, frightened, and motivated
primarily by a desire for a good meal and a warm bed. His heroism comes
not from physical prowess but from his sharp mind, a surprising amount
of luck, and, most importantly, a growing moral courage. This is most
evident in two key moments: his decision to spare Gollum's life out of
pity, and his choice to defy Thorin by giving the Arkenstone to the Men
and Elves to prevent a war. Tolkien, who once wrote, "I am in fact a
Hobbit (in all but size)," saw heroism in the quiet virtues of ordinary
English people.<sup>17</sup> The profound message of Bilbo's journey is
that heroism is not a quality one is born with, but a potential that
lies dormant within everyone. It is the story of an ordinary person
discovering, through great trial, that they are capable of extraordinary
things—a powerful and enduring message for any reader who has ever felt
small in a wide world.

### The Lure of Gold and the Weight of a Ring: Greed, Power, and Morality

Greed is one of the most powerful and destructive forces in *The
Hobbit*, driving the actions of villains and heroes alike.<sup>19</sup>
The great dragon Smaug is its ultimate embodiment. He sleeps on a vast
hoard of treasure he cannot use, and his rage upon discovering a single
cup has been stolen is described by Tolkien as the fury of "a rich man
who has lost something he never uses".<sup>19</sup> His greed is a dead,
sterile force that brings only destruction to the lands around the
Lonely Mountain.

The dwarves' quest, while presented as a noble attempt to reclaim their
homeland, is also deeply entangled with a desire for wealth. This desire
ultimately corrupts their leader, Thorin Oakenshield, who succumbs to
"dragon-sickness" upon reclaiming the treasure.<sup>6</sup> The
Arkenstone, the "Heart of the Mountain," becomes the central symbol of
this moral conflict. For Thorin, it is a symbol of his rightful
kingship, but it also fuels a manic possessiveness that makes him
willing to wage war against his potential allies rather than share any
part of the hoard.<sup>16</sup>

Bilbo stands as a moral counterpoint to this all-consuming greed. While
he is not entirely immune to temptation—he pockets both the magic ring
and the Arkenstone—his values are ultimately different. He is more
impressed by the beauty of the Elves' home in Rivendell and the simple
comforts of his own hobbit-hole than by mountains of gold. His defining
moral choice comes when he secretly gives the Arkenstone to Bard and the
Elvenking, hoping to use it as a bargaining chip to force a peaceful
settlement and prevent the Battle of Five Armies.<sup>6</sup> In this
moment, he prioritizes friendship, loyalty, and peace over any claim to
treasure.

The magic ring Bilbo finds in Gollum's cave is the novel's most potent
symbol of power and its corrupting nature. In *The Hobbit*, its primary
function is as a tool that grants invisibility, aiding Bilbo in his role
as a burglar.<sup>20</sup> Yet, there are hints of its darker influence,
particularly in Gollum's desperate, all-consuming need for his
"Precious".<sup>6</sup> This foreshadows the Ring's true identity,
revealed in

*The Lord of the Rings*, as the One Ring of the Dark Lord Sauron, an
object of ultimate power that inevitably corrupts anyone who claims
it.<sup>22</sup>

### There and Back Again: The Enduring Power of Home

The novel's full title, *The Hobbit, or There and Back Again*,
establishes the theme of home as its central, framing idea.<sup>4</sup>
The entire narrative is structured as a circular journey, beginning and
ending in the comfort of Bag End. Bilbo's deep and abiding love for his
home—with its well-stocked pantry, comfortable chairs, and peaceful
routine—provides the story's emotional core.<sup>17</sup> It is the
standard against which all the dangers and wonders of the outside world
are measured. His constant longing for his own bed and kettle serves as
a relatable anchor for the reader amidst the fantastical events of the
quest.<sup>19</sup>

This theme is made more complex by its juxtaposition with the dwarves'
quest. Their journey is also about home, but it is a quest for a home
that has been lost and must be reclaimed.<sup>19</sup> Their songs are
filled with a deep yearning for the halls of Erebor, their ancestral
birthright under the Lonely Mountain. The novel thus explores two
different kinds of relationships to home: the peaceful enjoyment of a
home one possesses, and the heroic struggle to regain a home that has
been taken away.

The story also delves into the complex reality of returning home. The
journey changes Bilbo fundamentally. When he finally arrives back in
Hobbiton, he discovers he has been "Presumed Dead" and his belongings
are being auctioned off.<sup>6</sup> While he eventually reclaims his
property, he can never fully reclaim his old life. He has seen mountains
and dragons, elves and goblins; his horizons have been irrevocably
expanded, and he no longer fits neatly into the narrow, predictable
world of his neighbors, who now consider him "queer".<sup>17</sup> This
newfound perspective brings with it a measure of isolation. He has come
back again, but home is not quite the same, because he is not the same.
This poignant conclusion suggests that the greatest adventures change us
in ways that make a simple return to the past impossible, leaving us
with a richer, but also more complex, understanding of our place in the
world.

## Part III: The Hobbit Travels the World: A Story in Translation

What began as a story for one man's children, born from a single
sentence on a blank exam paper, soon embarked on its own unexpected
journey across the globe. The quintessentially English tale of Bilbo
Baggins resonated with readers from vastly different cultures, becoming
a worldwide phenomenon. This global voyage was made possible through the
art of translation, a complex process that involves not just swapping
words, but rebuilding a world in a new language and for a new culture.

### Crossing Borders: The Global Voyage of Bilbo Baggins

*The Hobbit* was first published in the United Kingdom on September 21,
1937, by George Allen & Unwin.<sup>4</sup> With an initial print run of
only 1,500 copies, its success was immediate and overwhelming; the first
printing sold out completely by Christmas of that year.<sup>7</sup> The
book was awarded a prize from the

*New York Herald Tribune* for best juvenile fiction and was nominated
for the prestigious Carnegie Medal.<sup>4</sup> This initial acclaim
propelled the book onto the world stage. Today,

*The Hobbit* is hailed as a classic of children's literature, having
sold well over 100 million copies and been translated into more than 60
languages worldwide.<sup>4</sup>

The international spread began just a decade after its initial
publication. The very first translation was into Swedish, which appeared
in 1947. This was followed by the first German translation in 1957, and
then by Dutch and Polish editions, both appearing in 1960, marking the
book's entry into the literary landscape of Cold War-era
Europe.<sup>27</sup>

### A Tale of Two Germanys: Tolkien and the Shadow of Nazism

The journey of *The Hobbit* into the German language was fraught with
political and moral conflict, providing a stark, real-world example of
the very themes of integrity and resistance to evil that Tolkien
explored in his fiction. In 1938, a year after the book's publication,
the Berlin-based publishing house Rütten & Loening expressed interest in
a German translation.<sup>28</sup> However, this was Nazi Germany, and
the publishing industry was subject to its "lunatic laws".<sup>30</sup>
The publisher, which had been forcibly taken from its Jewish owners
under the racist Nuremberg Laws, informed Tolkien that before they could
proceed, he would need to provide proof of his "Aryan
descent".<sup>29</sup>

Tolkien, a devout Catholic who was deeply knowledgeable about Northern
European culture and proud of his own German surname, was appalled. He
wrote to his English publisher, Stanley Unwin, expressing his disgust at
the "impertinence" and the "wholly pernicious and unscientific
race-doctrine".<sup>30</sup> He made it clear he would rather "let a
German translation go hang" than comply with such a demand.<sup>30</sup>
He drafted two possible replies to the German publisher. One was a curt
dismissal. The other was a masterclass in intellectual and moral
defiance, in which he feigned ignorance of the term "arisch" (Aryan)
before delivering a powerful rebuke: "But if I am to understand that you
are enquiring whether I am of Jewish origin, I can only reply that I
regret that I appear to have no ancestors of that gifted
people".<sup>29</sup>

It is not certain which reply was ultimately sent, but the result was
the same: the deal collapsed. A German translation of *The Hobbit* did
not appear until two decades later, in 1957, long after the fall of the
Third Reich. The first German edition was titled *Der Kleiner Hobbit und
der große Zauberer* ("The Little Hobbit and the Great Wizard") and was
translated by Walter Scherf.<sup>27</sup> This episode transforms the
act of translation from a simple commercial transaction into a moral
test. Faced with a corrupting power, Tolkien chose principle over
profit, mirroring the ethical choices his own characters would have to
make. It is a powerful lesson that literature and its creators do not
exist in a vacuum, but are inextricably linked to the great moral
questions of their time.

### From Smaug to Sumaugu: Reimagining Middle-earth in Japan

Translating *The Hobbit* for a Japanese audience presented a different
set of challenges, rooted in culture rather than politics. The first
Japanese edition was published in 1965 by the prestigious publisher
Iwanami Shoten.<sup>31</sup> The task fell to Teiji Seta, a respected
literary scholar who had to bridge the gap between Tolkien's
world—steeped in Western European folklore, sagas, and medieval
history—and a readership largely unfamiliar with those
traditions.<sup>31</sup>

Seta's translation is celebrated for its skillful and creative solutions
to these cultural and linguistic hurdles.<sup>31</sup> A prime example
is his treatment of the character Gollum. In English, Gollum's speech is
defined by its grammatical corruption, such as adding an extra "-es" to
plural nouns (e.g., "hobbitses," "pocketses").<sup>32</sup> A direct
translation of this grammatical quirk would be awkward or impossible in
Japanese. Instead, Seta brilliantly transformed the grammatical
corruption into a

*phonetical* one. He had Gollum alter the endings of common Japanese
words, such as changing the standard sentence ender です (*desu*) to
でし (*deshi*), creating a speech pattern that sounded just as strange
and unsettling to Japanese ears as Gollum's English did to Western
ones.<sup>32</sup> The 1965 edition was also visually distinct,
featuring unique cover art by Ryuichi Terashima with a stylized,
Japanese-influenced aesthetic that set it apart from Western versions
and has since made it a prized collector's item.<sup>31</sup>

### A Glimpse of Other Worlds

The global spread of *The Hobbit* continued throughout the mid-20th
century. A French translation by Francis Ledoux, titled *Bilbo le
Hobbit*, was published in 1969, introducing Middle-earth to the
French-speaking world.<sup>27</sup>

The book's arrival in the Soviet Union in 1976 is another fascinating
chapter in its international story. Translated by Natalia Rakhmanova,
the Russian edition was published as a children's book and featured
now-iconic illustrations by Mikhail Belomlinsky.<sup>34</sup>
Belomlinsky's art gave the Russian version a unique and beloved
character. His depiction of Bilbo Baggins was famously based on the
popular Soviet actor Yevgeny Leonov, creating a warm, friendly, and
distinctly Russian-feeling hobbit that captured the hearts of a
generation of readers behind the Iron Curtain.<sup>35</sup>

These examples highlight the dynamic process of cultural translation.
Each new edition was not just a linguistic copy but a creative
reinterpretation, adapting the story's text and visuals to resonate with
a new audience and cementing *The Hobbit*'s status as a truly global
work of literature.

| Original English Term | Polish (Skibniewska, 1960) | German (Scherf, 1957) | French (Ledoux, 1969) | Japanese (Seta, 1965) |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| Bilbo Baggins | Bilbo Baggins | Bilbo Beutlin | Bilbon Sacquet | ビルボ・バギンズ (Birubo Baginzu) |
| Dwarf / Dwarves | Krasnolud / Krasnoludy | Zwerg / Zwerge | Nain / Nains | 小人 (Kobito) |
| Rivendell | Rivendell | Bruchtal | Fondcombe | 裂け谷 (Saketani) |
| Mirkwood | Mroczna Puszcza | Düsterwald | Forêt Noire | 闇の森 (Yami no Mori) |
| Smaug | Smaug | Smaug | Smaug | スマウグ (Sumaugu) |

## Part IV: A Special Focus - ***Hobbit, czyli tam i z powrotem***: The Polish Phenomenon

While *The Hobbit* has achieved worldwide acclaim, its reception in
Poland is a unique story of deep cultural resonance and enduring
affection. Published during a challenging period of the country's
history, it was embraced not just as a fantasy story but as a cherished
classic that would become a cornerstone of Polish childhood, education,
and literary culture. Its journey from an English manuscript to a Polish
bookshelf reveals how a foreign story can become a beloved part of a
nation's own cultural fabric.

### An Unexpected Party Behind the Iron Curtain

The first Polish edition of *The Hobbit*, titled *Hobbit, czyli tam i z
powrotem*, was published in 1960 by the state-owned publishing house
Iskry.<sup>22</sup> The timing of this publication is remarkable. In
1960, Poland was the Polish People's Republic, a communist state
operating within the sphere of influence of the Soviet Union. In this
political climate, the cultural landscape was heavily controlled, and
literature from the West, particularly from Britain and the United
States, was often regarded with suspicion or censored for ideological
reasons.<sup>38</sup>

The publication of a fantasy novel by a devoutly Catholic, Oxford-based
English author was, therefore, anything but ordinary. While the specific
reasons for its approval by state censors are not detailed in available
sources, its classification as a children's book likely played a crucial
role, allowing it to be perceived as less politically threatening than
an adult novel. Nevertheless, the book's core themes would have held a
powerful, if subtle, appeal for a Polish readership living under an
oppressive political system. The story of a small, seemingly
insignificant individual standing up to a great and tyrannical evil, the
quest to reclaim a lost homeland, and the clear moral condemnation of
greed and the abuse of power would have resonated deeply in a nation
that had long struggled for its own sovereignty and identity. For many
Polish readers, Bilbo's adventure was more than just fantasy; it was a
whisper of hope and a validation of the courage of the small against the
great.

### The Canon-Maker: Maria Skibniewska's Enduring Translation

The success and cultural embedding of *The Hobbit* in Poland are
inseparable from the work of its first translator, Maria Skibniewska
(1904-1984).<sup>37</sup> Skibniewska was a highly respected literary
translator, known for her masterful Polish renderings of major English
and French authors.<sup>39</sup> Her 1960 translation of

*The Hobbit*, and her subsequent work on *The Lord of the Rings*, are
widely considered to be the "canonical" Polish versions of Tolkien's
work, setting a standard of quality and tone that has endured for over
half a century.<sup>37</sup>

A translator's task is often perceived as a technical exercise of
finding equivalent words. Skibniewska's work, however, demonstrates that
great translation is a profound act of cultural creation. Her most
significant and influential decision was her choice of the word
*krasnolud* to translate "dwarf".<sup>37</sup> In English, Tolkien's
"dwarves" are drawn from the stern, proud, and formidable figures of
Norse mythology. The closest word in Polish folklore was

*krasnoludek*, which refers to a small, gnome-like creature, more akin
to a garden gnome than a warrior of Erebor. A direct, literal
translation might have failed to capture the gravitas of Tolkien's
characters. Skibniewska's genius was to adapt the familiar Polish term,
dropping the diminutive "-ek" ending to create *krasnolud*. This single
choice brilliantly bridged the cultural gap, giving Tolkien's race a
name that felt both familiar and appropriately serious to Polish
readers. She effectively created a new category in the Polish
imagination, embedding Tolkien's dwarves into the native cultural
landscape.

This act, combined with the overall literary excellence of her prose,
elevated Skibniewska from a mere translator to a co-creator of the
Polish Middle-earth. While she did not have direct correspondence with
Tolkien, she did receive some of his general translation guidelines
through the publisher.<sup>39</sup> Her work is consistently praised for
its elegance and its success in capturing Tolkien's distinctive
style.<sup>39</sup> For generations of Poles, her words are not just a
translation of

*The Hobbit*; they *are* *The Hobbit*.

### A Dragon for the Polish School of Posters: The Art of Jan Młodożeniec

The unique identity of the first Polish *Hobbit* was also shaped by its
visual presentation. The 1960 edition was illustrated by Jan Młodożeniec
(1929-2000), a leading figure in the internationally acclaimed Polish
School of Posters.<sup>37</sup> This artistic movement was known for its
bold, graphic, and often painterly modernist style, which favored
metaphorical imagery and concise, powerful design over literal
representation.

Młodożeniec's illustrations for *The Hobbit* are a striking departure
from Tolkien's own delicate drawings or the more traditional fantasy art
that would later become associated with Middle-earth. His work is
stylized, expressive, and graphic. The cover of the 1960 edition is
particularly iconic, featuring a powerful, almost abstract depiction of
a red dragon against a dark background, a design that is instantly
recognizable to Polish readers who grew up with this
version.<sup>41</sup> This distinctive artistic vision meant that for
the first generation of Polish fans, the visual world of Bilbo's journey
was defined not by Tolkien's own hand, but by the unique modernist
aesthetic of one of Poland's greatest 20th-century artists.

### From Bookshelf to Backpack: ***The Hobbit*** as a Polish School Staple

One of the most crucial factors in cementing *The Hobbit*'s place in
Polish culture has been its inclusion in the national school curriculum.
For many years, *Hobbit, czyli tam i z powrotem* has been a *lektura
szkolna*—a piece of required reading—for students in the middle grades
of primary school, typically grades 4-6.<sup>45</sup>

This institutionalization has had a profound and lasting impact. It
ensures that nearly every Polish citizen encounters Tolkien's world at a
formative age, making it a shared cultural experience that transcends
generations. For countless Polish children, *The Hobbit* has served as
their first introduction to the fantasy genre and, for many, the book
that ignited a lifelong love of reading. In online forums and reviews,
Polish readers frequently refer to it with great affection as "the best
school reading," a welcome and exciting adventure that stands in stark
contrast to other, more tedious required texts.<sup>46</sup> Its status
as a school book has woven it into the very fabric of Polish education
and childhood, guaranteeing its legacy for the foreseeable future.

### The Translation Debate: A Living Legacy

The deep connection Polish readers feel to *The Hobbit* is evident in
the lively and passionate debates surrounding its translation. While
Maria Skibniewska's 1960 version remains the beloved "canonical" text
for most, it is not the only one. Two other major Polish translations
have since been published: one by Paulina Braiter-Ziemkiewicz in 1997,
and another in 2002 by Andrzej Polkowski, who is also famous in Poland
for his translation of the *Harry Potter* series.<sup>22</sup>

The existence of these alternative translations has sparked considerable
discussion among Polish Tolkien fans.<sup>42</sup> Proponents of the
newer versions point out, correctly, that Tolkien made several revisions
to the English text of

*The Hobbit* after 1960 (most notably to the chapter "Riddles in the
Dark" to better align it with *The Lord of the Rings*). Skibniewska's
translation was based on an earlier edition, and therefore newer
translations like Braiter-Ziemkiewicz's can be seen as more textually
accurate to Tolkien's final intent.<sup>39</sup> However, many readers
remain fiercely loyal to Skibniewska's original, praising its literary
flow and classic feel, and sometimes criticizing the choices made in
newer versions regarding the translation of proper names.<sup>42</sup>
This ongoing debate is a testament to the book's status as a living and
cherished part of Polish culture. The fact that readers care so deeply
about the nuances of its translation demonstrates the profound and
personal connection they have with the story of the hobbit who went
there and back again.

## Conclusion: The Enduring Legacy of a Little Hobbit

More than eighty years after its initial publication, *The Hobbit*
continues to captivate new generations of readers and viewers around the
world. Its journey from a single, handwritten page to a global
multimedia franchise is a testament to the enduring power of its story.
In the 21st century, Bilbo's adventure is experienced not only through
the pages of a book but through blockbuster films, video games, and a
vibrant online fan culture, each new form adding layers of meaning and
sparking fresh debate. As our own world continues to change, we find new
ways to read and understand Tolkien's work, ensuring that the tale of a
small hero on a great quest remains as relevant as ever.

### From Page to Screen and Beyond

The modern perception of *The Hobbit* has been undeniably shaped by its
many adaptations, most prominently by Peter Jackson's epic film trilogy:
*An Unexpected Journey* (2012), *The Desolation of Smaug* (2013), and
*The Battle of the Five Armies* (2014).<sup>54</sup> These films brought
Middle-earth to a massive new global audience with stunning visual
effects and a grand, heroic scale. However, they were met with a mixed
critical reception. Many fans of the book and critics felt that the
decision to expand a relatively short children's novel into a nearly
nine-hour cinematic trilogy resulted in a bloated narrative, with added
subplots and characters that diluted the charm and focus of the original
story.<sup>55</sup> Despite these criticisms, the film series was an
immense financial success, grossing a combined total of over \$2.9
billion worldwide and cementing the visual identity of Middle-earth for
a new generation.<sup>54</sup>

Beyond the cinema, the world of *The Hobbit* has been explored through
numerous interactive adaptations. The story has been the basis for video
games spanning decades of technological evolution, from the pioneering
text-adventure game of 1982 to a popular action-adventure title in 2003
and the family-friendly LEGO version in 2014.<sup>58</sup> Each
adaptation offers a different way to experience the quest for the Lonely
Mountain, allowing players to step into Bilbo's furry feet and face down
trolls, goblins, and dragons for themselves.

### The Hobbit in the 21st Century: New Readings for a New Generation

As society evolves, so too does our understanding of classic literature.
Today, readers and scholars are engaging with *The Hobbit* through new
critical lenses that raise important questions and generate fresh
interpretations. The near-total absence of female characters in the
novel, a point of criticism for decades, has led to fascinating feminist
readings. Some scholars have deconstructed the character of Bilbo
himself, arguing that his focus on domesticity, his aversion to
violence, and his role as a peace-weaver position him as a figure who
embodies traditionally feminine virtues in a hyper-masculine
world.<sup>62</sup>

Similarly, queer readings of the text have explored the intense,
emotionally charged bonds between the male characters and have
interpreted Bilbo's status as a "confirmed bachelor" as a reflection of
the coded ways in which queer identities were often lived in Tolkien's
time.<sup>23</sup> Furthermore, in an era increasingly conscious of
post-colonial and racial dynamics, the depiction of the races of
Middle-earth has come under scrutiny. Academic discussions analyze
Tolkien's portrayal of dwarves, which he himself linked to Jewish
people, and the characterization of goblins and orcs as an inherently
evil and "degraded" race, examining these elements within the context of
20th-century racial attitudes.<sup>63</sup> These contemporary critiques
do not seek to diminish the power of the original story but rather to
demonstrate its complexity and its capacity to provoke new conversations
for a new generation of readers.

### Why We Still Go on Adventures with Bilbo

Despite the passage of nearly a century, the evolution of fantasy as a
genre, and the shifting cultural landscapes, the fundamental appeal of
*The Hobbit* remains as strong as ever. It is a story that speaks to the
universal human experience of being thrust into a world that feels too
large and too frightening, and finding within oneself an unexpected
reserve of strength and courage.

The book's enduring legacy lies in its timeless themes. It champions the
idea that true heroism is not the domain of kings and warriors but can
be found in the heart of the most ordinary individual.<sup>17</sup> It
serves as a powerful cautionary tale about the corrupting nature of
greed and a celebration of the simple virtues of kindness, fellowship,
and compassion.<sup>15</sup> Above all, it is a story that understands
the profound comfort of home and the equally profound, transformative
power of stepping beyond one's own front door.<sup>17</sup> For a young
generation navigating the complexities and anxieties of the modern
world, Bilbo Baggins's journey "there and back again" continues to be a
wise, witty, and deeply comforting guide to finding one's own unexpected
adventure and, in the process, discovering one's own true self.

#### Cytowane prace

1.  The Myths of the Author: Tolkien and the Medieval Origins of the
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://dc.swosu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1130&context=mythlore</u>](https://dc.swosu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1130&context=mythlore)

2.  Examination of the Cultural Influences Behind The Hobbit by Gillian
    Singler, Alicia Guthmiller, & Kevin Smith - Minnesota English
    Journal, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://minnesotaenglishjournalonline.org/2014/03/10/collaborative-paper-in-an-online-environment-article-2/</u>](https://minnesotaenglishjournalonline.org/2014/03/10/collaborative-paper-in-an-online-environment-article-2/)

3.  Biography – The Tolkien Society, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tolkiensociety.org/discover/biography/</u>](https://www.tolkiensociety.org/discover/biography/)

4.  The Hobbit - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hobbit</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hobbit)

5.  Tolkien's "The Hobbit" as Mythology? Showing 1-15 of 15 - Goodreads,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/1110606-tolkien-s-the-hobbit-as-mythology</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/1110606-tolkien-s-the-hobbit-as-mythology)

6.  The Hobbit – An Introduction - The Tolkien Society, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tolkiensociety.org/app/uploads/2016/11/The-Hobbit-An-Introduction.pdf</u>](https://www.tolkiensociety.org/app/uploads/2016/11/The-Hobbit-An-Introduction.pdf)

7.  The Hobbit - Tolkien Collector, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tolkiencollector.com/hobbhist.htm</u>](https://www.tolkiencollector.com/hobbhist.htm)

8.  J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography - HarperCollins Publishers, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.harpercollins.com/products/j-r-r-tolkien-a-biography-humphrey-carpenter</u>](https://www.harpercollins.com/products/j-r-r-tolkien-a-biography-humphrey-carpenter)

9.  J.r.r. Tolkien: A Biography by Humphrey Carpenter, Paperback \|
    Barnes & Noble®, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/jrr-tolkien-humphrey-carpenter/1103665411</u>](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/jrr-tolkien-humphrey-carpenter/1103665411)

10. 1977 - Humphrey Carpenter - J.R.R. Tolkien: a biography, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://tolkienlibrary.com/booksabouttolkien/biography/description.php</u>](https://tolkienlibrary.com/booksabouttolkien/biography/description.php)

11. The Hobbit - Tolkien Shop, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tolkienshop.com/contents/en-uk/d4.html</u>](https://www.tolkienshop.com/contents/en-uk/d4.html)

12. Tolkien And The Great War: The Threshold of Middle-earth by John
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/tolkien-and-the-great-war-john-garth/1111395503</u>](https://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/tolkien-and-the-great-war-john-garth/1111395503)

13. Tolkien and the Great War - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tolkien_and_the_Great_War</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tolkien_and_the_Great_War)

14. Tolkien and the Great War: The Threshold of Middle-earth - -
    HarperReach, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.harperreach.com/products/tolkien-and-the-great-war-the-threshold-of-middle-earth-john-garth-9780007119530/</u>](https://www.harperreach.com/products/tolkien-and-the-great-war-the-threshold-of-middle-earth-john-garth-9780007119530/)

15. J. R. R. Tolkien's "The Hobbit" as a Bildungsroman -
    FFOS-repozitorij, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://repozitorij.ffos.hr/islandora/object/ffos%3A6249/datastream/PDF/view</u>](https://repozitorij.ffos.hr/islandora/object/ffos%3A6249/datastream/PDF/view)

16. The Hobbit Analysis - Learn For Your Life, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.learn4yourlife.com/the-hobbit-analysis.html</u>](https://www.learn4yourlife.com/the-hobbit-analysis.html)

17. The Hobbit: Themes \| SparkNotes, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/hobbit/themes/</u>](https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/hobbit/themes/)

18. Tolkien's “I am in fact a Hobbit (in all but size)” in Context - A
    Pilgrim in Narnia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://apilgriminnarnia.com/2017/09/22/in-fact-a-hobbit/</u>](https://apilgriminnarnia.com/2017/09/22/in-fact-a-hobbit/)

19. The Hobbit Themes \| LitCharts, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-hobbit/themes</u>](https://www.litcharts.com/lit/the-hobbit/themes)

20. The Hobbit Themes and Analysis, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://bookanalysis.com/jrr-tolkien/the-hobbit/themes-analysis/</u>](https://bookanalysis.com/jrr-tolkien/the-hobbit/themes-analysis/)

21. Biblical Themes in “The Hobbit” - Reasons to Believe, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://reasons.org/explore/blogs/reflections/biblical-themes-in-the-hobbit</u>](https://reasons.org/explore/blogs/reflections/biblical-themes-in-the-hobbit)

22. Hobbit, czyli tam i z powrotem – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hobbit,\_czyli_tam_i_z_powrotem</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hobbit,_czyli_tam_i_z_powrotem)

23. The Tolkien in Bilbo Baggins - The Gay & Lesbian Review, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://glreview.org/article/the-tolkien-in-bilbo-baggins/</u>](https://glreview.org/article/the-tolkien-in-bilbo-baggins/)

24. The History of the Hobbit: One Volume Edition - Harper Collins,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://harpercollins.co.uk/products/the-history-of-the-hobbit-one-volume-edition-j-r-r-tolkienjohn-d-rateliff</u>](https://harpercollins.co.uk/products/the-history-of-the-hobbit-one-volume-edition-j-r-r-tolkienjohn-d-rateliff)

25. The History of 'The Hobbit' : John D. Rateliff, : 9780007440825 -
    Blackwell's, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://blackwells.co.uk/bookshop/product/The-History-of-The-Hobbit-by-John-D-Rateliff-J-R-R-Tolkien/9780007440825</u>](https://blackwells.co.uk/bookshop/product/The-History-of-The-Hobbit-by-John-D-Rateliff-J-R-R-Tolkien/9780007440825)

26. 8 fun and fascinating facts about "The Hobbit" - Antique Trader,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.antiquetrader.com/uncategorized/8-fun-fascinating-facts-the-hobbit</u>](https://www.antiquetrader.com/uncategorized/8-fun-fascinating-facts-the-hobbit)

27. About Hobbits – Hobbithunter, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://hobbithunter.nl/about-hobbits/</u>](https://hobbithunter.nl/about-hobbits/)

28. Was J.R.R. Tolkien's book "The Hobbit" either published in English
    or completely banned in Nazi Germany? : r/AskHistorians - Reddit,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/s8fdvw/was_jrr_tolkiens_book_the_hobbit_either_published/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/s8fdvw/was_jrr_tolkiens_book_the_hobbit_either_published/)

29. The German Edition of “The Hobbit” \| by Adam Roberts - Medium,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://medium.com/adams-notebook/the-german-edition-of-the-hobbit-397587413a29</u>](https://medium.com/adams-notebook/the-german-edition-of-the-hobbit-397587413a29)

30. J.R.R. Tolkien's Brilliant Reply To Nazis in 1930s Germany - 'I
    Regret I Am No Gifted Jew', otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://flashbak.com/jrr-tolkien-letter-nazi-the-hobbit-1938-429966/</u>](https://flashbak.com/jrr-tolkien-letter-nazi-the-hobbit-1938-429966/)

31. TOLKIEN, J.R.R. The Hobbit (Japanese edition) » De Burca Rare Books,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.deburcararebooks.com/product/authors/international-authors/tolkien-japanese-edition/</u>](https://www.deburcararebooks.com/product/authors/international-authors/tolkien-japanese-edition/)

32. The register of Tolkien's The Hobbit and how it is translated into
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2:1570670</u>](http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2:1570670)

33. J.R.R. Tolkien - The Hobbit (Japanese edition) - YouTube, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j\_\_tOTwZHTk</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j__tOTwZHTk)

34. www.cobaltjade.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.cobaltjade.com/2025/03/the-russian-hobbit-part-1/#:~:text=As%20I%20said%20in%20my,illustrations%20by%20artist%20Mikhail%20Belomlinsky.</u>](http://www.cobaltjade.com/2025/03/the-russian-hobbit-part-1/#:~:text=As%20I%20said%20in%20my,illustrations%20by%20artist%20Mikhail%20Belomlinsky.)

35. The Russian Hobbit, Part 1 - The Cobalt Jade Website, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://www.cobaltjade.com/2025/03/the-russian-hobbit-part-1/</u>](http://www.cobaltjade.com/2025/03/the-russian-hobbit-part-1/)

36. The Hobbit Soviet Russian book by J.R.R.Tolkien - Goodreads,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/138787126</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/138787126)

37. TOLKIEN- THE HOBBIT 1st. polish edition, leather rebound - Sobieski.
    Antykwariat, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://antyksobieski.pl/en/tolkien-the-hobbit-1st-edition.html</u>](https://antyksobieski.pl/en/tolkien-the-hobbit-1st-edition.html)

38. The Reception and Impact of Western and Polish Emigre Books and ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://americandiplomacy.web.unc.edu/2012/10/the-reception-and-impact-of-western-and-polish-emigre-books-and-periodicals-in-communist-ruled-poland-between-july-1-1956-and-june-30-1973/</u>](https://americandiplomacy.web.unc.edu/2012/10/the-reception-and-impact-of-western-and-polish-emigre-books-and-periodicals-in-communist-ruled-poland-between-july-1-1956-and-june-30-1973/)

39. Maria Skibniewska - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maria_Skibniewska</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maria_Skibniewska)

40. She has translated the world of Middle-earth for us - Elendilion,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.elendilion.pl/2008/11/04/she-has-translated-the-world-of-middle-earth-for-us/</u>](https://www.elendilion.pl/2008/11/04/she-has-translated-the-world-of-middle-earth-for-us/)

41. TOLKIEN- THE HOBBIT 1st. polish edition, leather rebound - Sobieski.
    Antykwariat, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://antyksobieski.pl/manufacturer/en/antykwariat-sobieski/tolkien-the-hobbit-1st-polish-edition-leather-rebound.html</u>](https://antyksobieski.pl/manufacturer/en/antykwariat-sobieski/tolkien-the-hobbit-1st-polish-edition-leather-rebound.html)

42. Undergraduate thesis survey - which Polish translation of "The
    Fellowship of the Ring" do you consider better? Comparison of
    excerpts. : r/ksiazki - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/ksiazki/comments/1k056un/ankieta_do_pracy_licencjackiej_kt%C3%B3re_polskie/?tl=en</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/ksiazki/comments/1k056un/ankieta_do_pracy_licencjackiej_kt%C3%B3re_polskie/?tl=en)

43. "Hobbit, czyli tam i z powrotem" J.R.R. Tolkien Tłumaczenie: Maria
    Skibniewska Opracowanie graficzne: Jan Młodożeniec - Pinterest,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ar.pinterest.com/pin/10133167892147895/</u>](https://ar.pinterest.com/pin/10133167892147895/)

44. The Hobbit or There and Back by J.R.R. Tolkien graphic design. Jan
    Młodożeniec \[FIRST EDITION / 1960\]. - OneBid, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://one.bid/en/ksiazki-i-starodruki-hobbit-czyli-tam-i-z-powrotem-j-r-r-tolkien-oprac-graf-jan-mlodozeniec-pierwsze-wydanie-1960/2163987</u>](https://one.bid/en/ksiazki-i-starodruki-hobbit-czyli-tam-i-z-powrotem-j-r-r-tolkien-oprac-graf-jan-mlodozeniec-pierwsze-wydanie-1960/2163987)

45. Hobbit, czyli tam i z powrotem - J.R.R. Tolkien \| Książka w
    Lubimyczytac.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5121473/hobbit-czyli-tam-i-z-powrotem</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5121473/hobbit-czyli-tam-i-z-powrotem)

46. Recenzja książki ,,Hobbit, czyli tam i z powrotem" Korneliusz
    Denarski III miejsce w konkursie na recenzję książki (8-12 lat) -
    Między półkami, między słowami, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://biblioteka-w-wesolej.blogspot.com/2019/06/recenzja-ksiazki-hobbit-czyli-tam-i-z.html</u>](http://biblioteka-w-wesolej.blogspot.com/2019/06/recenzja-ksiazki-hobbit-czyli-tam-i-z.html)

47. www.tvp.info, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tvp.info/79027056/lista-lektur-szkolnych-pan-tadeusz-akademia-pana-kleksa-hobbit-opowiesci-z-narni#:~:text=Lista%20lektur%20szkolnych%20dla%20klasy,od%201%20wrze%C5%9Bnia%202024%20r.&text=John%20Ronald%20Reuel%20Tolkien%20%E2%80%9EHobbit%2C%20czyli%20tam%20i%20z%20powrotem%E2%80%9D.</u>](https://www.tvp.info/79027056/lista-lektur-szkolnych-pan-tadeusz-akademia-pana-kleksa-hobbit-opowiesci-z-narni#:~:text=Lista%20lektur%20szkolnych%20dla%20klasy,od%201%20wrze%C5%9Bnia%202024%20r.&text=John%20Ronald%20Reuel%20Tolkien%20%E2%80%9EHobbit%2C%20czyli%20tam%20i%20z%20powrotem%E2%80%9D.)

48. Stała lista lektur wraca do podstawówek - Prawo.pl, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.prawo.pl/oswiata/stala-lista-lektur-wraca-do-podstawowek,133285.html</u>](https://www.prawo.pl/oswiata/stala-lista-lektur-wraca-do-podstawowek,133285.html)

49. TCG - Hobbit albo Tam i z powrotem - Tolkien Collector's Guide,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tolkienguide.com/modules/wiwimod/index.php?page=Hobbit+Polish+07b</u>](https://www.tolkienguide.com/modules/wiwimod/index.php?page=Hobbit+Polish+07b)

50. Manipulation and Readers Influence on Polish Translations of Harry
    Potter Series, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ojs.tnkul.pl/index.php/rh/article/view/6313</u>](https://ojs.tnkul.pl/index.php/rh/article/view/6313)

51. Today is the premiere of the Polish translation of the sixth volume
    of The History of Middle-earth, titled "The Return of the Shadow"
    and related to the history of the creation of The Lord of the Rings.
    : r/tolkienbooks - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/tolkienbooks/comments/1ljjqr4/today_is_the_premiere_of_the_polish_translation/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/tolkienbooks/comments/1ljjqr4/today_is_the_premiere_of_the_polish_translation/)

52. Hobbit J.R.R Tolkien \[fantasy\] - Ulubiona Książka - YouTube,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xLZ60kDzrfA</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xLZ60kDzrfA)

53. pomocy :) - Hobbit: Bitwa Pięciu Armii - Forum - Filmweb, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.filmweb.pl/film/Hobbit%3A+Bitwa+Pi%C4%99ciu+Armii-2014-662242/discussion/pomocy+%3A%29,2408466</u>](https://www.filmweb.pl/film/Hobbit%3A+Bitwa+Pi%C4%99ciu+Armii-2014-662242/discussion/pomocy+%3A%29,2408466)

54. The Hobbit (film series) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hobbit\_(film_series)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hobbit_(film_series))

55. The Hobbit movies draw significantly low total grosses - The Daily
    Wildcat, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://wildcat.arizona.edu/109403/uncategorized/the-hobbit-movies-draw-significantly-low-total-grosses/</u>](https://wildcat.arizona.edu/109403/uncategorized/the-hobbit-movies-draw-significantly-low-total-grosses/)

56. \[Worldwide\] Does not get mentioned enough, but the Hobbit trilogy
    averaged almost a billion (979) dollars per film. : r/boxoffice -
    Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/boxoffice/comments/cxib4x/worldwide_does_not_get_mentioned_enough_but_the/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/boxoffice/comments/cxib4x/worldwide_does_not_get_mentioned_enough_but_the/)

57. \[NA\] why do people like to say the hobbit trilogy was a box office
    disappoint? - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/boxoffice/comments/a771p0/na_why_do_people_like_to_say_the_hobbit_trilogy/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/boxoffice/comments/a771p0/na_why_do_people_like_to_say_the_hobbit_trilogy/)

58. www.google.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.google.com/search?q=list+of+The+Hobbit+video+games</u>](https://www.google.com/search?q=list+of+The+Hobbit+video+games)

59. Category:Video games based on Middle-earth - Wikipedia, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Video_games_based_on_Middle-earth</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Video_games_based_on_Middle-earth)

60. Every Lord of the Rings Game Ever Created! - Geeky Gorevan,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://geekygorevan.co.uk/every-lord-of-the-rings-game-ever-created/</u>](https://geekygorevan.co.uk/every-lord-of-the-rings-game-ever-created/)

61. The Hobbit: The Prelude to the Lord of the Rings Reviews -
    Metacritic, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.metacritic.com/game/the-hobbit/</u>](https://www.metacritic.com/game/the-hobbit/)

62. More to The Hobbit than Meets the Eye: Deconstructing Femininity in
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://dc.swosu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1072&context=mythpro</u>](https://dc.swosu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1072&context=mythpro)

63. Tolkien and race - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tolkien_and_race</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tolkien_and_race)

64. The Symbolic and Narrative Degradation of Goblins within The
    Hobbit - e-Publications@Marquette, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://epublications.marquette.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1011&context=english_4610jrrt</u>](https://epublications.marquette.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1011&context=english_4610jrrt)
