# The Peasants: How a Century-Old Polish Epic Became a Global Phenomenon

## Part I: The World Behind the Book

### Why Should You Care About a 100-Year-Old Book About Polish Farmers?

Let's be honest: a 900-page, four-volume novel about 19th-century Polish
peasants doesn't exactly scream "must-read". It sounds more like the
kind of book your teacher assigns to test your will to live. But what if
that book was less a dusty historical document and more a high-stakes
reality show, a timeless drama of love, betrayal, and survival, where
every choice is scrutinized by the entire community and has
life-or-death consequences?.<sup>2</sup> Welcome to Lipce, the village
at the heart of Władysław Reymont's

*Chłopi* (pronounced *HWO-pee*), a world that is more relevant, raw, and
revolutionary than you could ever imagine.

The story's central conflict revolves around Jagna, a beautiful,
free-spirited young woman who becomes the focus of local envy and
suspicion, ultimately facing exile from her community. Her story is a
startlingly prescient 19th-century look at the mechanics of public
shaming and cancel culture, exploring the brutal ways a community can
punish those who overstep its rigid social norms.<sup>3</sup> When the
peasants of Lipce rise up to defend their forest from being sold off by
the local lord, their struggle mirrors the passion and desperation of
modern environmental activists and social justice movements fighting to
protect their land and rights.<sup>2</sup>

This isn't just a historical parallel. In the 2020s, *Chłopi* exploded
back into the global consciousness, driven by two powerful forces.
First, a stunning animated film, where every single frame is a
hand-painted oil painting, brought the world of Lipce to life with
breathtaking beauty, earning international acclaim and an Oscar
nomination push.<sup>1</sup> Second, the film's soundtrack went viral on
TikTok, with the song "Jesień – Tańcuj" becoming the backdrop for
millions of videos, introducing a new generation to the story's Slavic
folk aesthetic and raw energy.<sup>7</sup>

*Chłopi* is a story that proves the most powerful human dramas—about who
we love, what we own, where we belong, and who gets to decide our
fate—are truly timeless. It’s a book that was shocking in 1904 and
remains just as shocking today, asking us uncomfortable questions about
the eternal tug-of-war between the individual and the community, freedom
and survival.

### The Unlikely Genius: Forging a Nobel Laureate

The man who created this epic was as unconventional and rebellious as
the world he depicted. Władysław Reymont was a master of reinvention, an
outsider whose life of struggle and failure became the raw material for
his art.

#### A Rebel's Biography

To understand *Chłopi*, you first have to understand the man who was
born Stanisław Władysław Rejment on May 7, 1867.<sup>10</sup> He later
changed the spelling of his surname and swapped his first names, perhaps
to sound more distinguished.<sup>11</sup> He was one of seven children
of a village organist, a man of some local standing who had ambitions
for his children.<sup>11</sup> Władysław, however, was a profound
disappointment. He refused to get a formal education, learn to play the
organ, or follow any of the paths laid out for him.<sup>11</sup>

His youth was a series of chaotic misadventures. He ran away from a
tailor apprenticeship in Warsaw. He joined a traveling theater company,
only to discover he had no acting talent; one famous anecdote tells of
him making a dramatic stage exit and walking straight into a
wardrobe.<sup>13</sup> He worked a miserable, soul-crushing job as a
clerk for the railway, stationed in a remote peasant cottage, living on
"tea, bread, and dreams". He was, by his own account, a failure at
everything.

The turning point came in 1900, when he was seriously injured in a train
accident.<sup>11</sup> While the event left him with lifelong health
problems, the substantial financial settlement he received finally
granted him what he had always lacked: the freedom to write full-time
without needing another job to survive.<sup>13</sup> During his
recovery, he was cared for by a nurse named Aurelia Szabłowska. She
eventually divorced her husband and married Reymont in 1902, bringing a
measure of stability to his turbulent life.<sup>11</sup>

#### Mind-Blown Moment: Debunking the Myths

Two persistent myths cloud the popular understanding of Reymont, but the
facts tell a more complex story.

- **Myth 1: Reymont was a peasant.**

  - **Fact: False.** While he lived among peasants and knew their world
    intimately, he was not one of them. His father was the village
    organist, a respected position, and his family had distant roots in
    the impoverished Polish nobility, or *szlachta*.<sup>11</sup> His
    profound understanding of peasant life came from years of keen
    observation and personal immersion, not from birthright. This
    outsider's perspective was crucial, allowing him to see the
    community with both empathy and critical distance.

- **Myth 2: He was an uneducated simpleton.**

  - **Fact: False.** Reymont rejected formal schooling, but he was a
    voracious and passionate autodidact. From a young age, he devoured
    books, hiding them under his clothes to read while tending sheep,
    and gaining a deep knowledge of Polish and world literature on his
    own terms.<sup>13</sup> His writing is not the work of a naive folk
    storyteller; it is a sophisticated and deliberate blend of major
    European literary styles, including realism, naturalism, and
    impressionism.<sup>17</sup> His lack of formal education may have
    been a creative blessing, freeing him from the rigid academic
    conventions of the era and allowing him to forge a raw, new literary
    language infused with authentic dialect.

Reymont's life story is a testament to the power of the outsider's gaze.
He was always on the fringes—not quite a peasant, not quite an actor,
not quite a railwayman. This constant state of being an observer,
combined with his personal experience of poverty and struggle, gave him
a unique vantage point. He could document the world of Lipce with the
meticulous detail of an anthropologist while feeling its passions with
the soul of a poet.

### The Creation of an Epic: A Story in Itself

The journey of *Chłopi* from a controversial magazine serial to a Nobel
Prize-winning masterpiece is as dramatic as the novel itself.

#### The Book That Almost Wasn't

Reymont’s masterpiece was born from an act of profound artistic
self-doubt. In 1901, he had a complete first version of the novel ready
for publication.<sup>12</sup> However, deeply unsatisfied with the
result, he deemed it worthless and threw the entire manuscript into the
fire.<sup>12</sup> He then started over from scratch, a process that
would take another seven years.<sup>12</sup> This radical act of
creative destruction was essential, allowing him to reshape the material
into the epic four-part structure that defines the final work.

The novel was published in installments, a common practice for major
19th-century writers like Bolesław Prus and Henryk Sienkiewicz. The
first episodes appeared in the prestigious weekly magazine *Tygodnik
Ilustrowany* on January 18, 1902, with the serialization running until
1908.<sup>5</sup> The book volumes were published between 1904 and
1909.<sup>5</sup>

#### Initial Reception: The Audience Revolt

Far from being celebrated as an instant classic, the first installments
of *Chłopi* were met with shock and anger from the magazine's educated,
urban readership. These readers, influenced by the romanticized
"peasant-mania" of the era, expected a picturesque, idealized portrait
of country life. Instead, Reymont gave them a brutally honest depiction
of the peasants' world, complete with its poverty, cruelty, and raw
human passions. The reaction was swift and severe. Readers condemned the
novel as "godless, brutal, and immoral". According to Professor
Franciszek Ziejka, hundreds of subscribers canceled their subscriptions
in protest, demanding their money back if the magazine continued to
print such a scandalous story.

#### The Nobel Prize: A Political and Cultural Catalyst

The novel's journey from domestic scandal to national treasure was
catalyzed by international recognition. While the initial Polish
reception was hostile, the book found a more appreciative audience
abroad, particularly after its German translation. This foreign
validation culminated in the ultimate literary honor: the 1924 Nobel
Prize in Literature, for which Reymont beat out literary giants like
Thomas Mann and Thomas Hardy.<sup>22</sup>

The Nobel Prize was a transformative event. For Poland, which had only
regained its independence in 1918 after 123 years of being partitioned
and erased from the map, the award was a moment of immense national
pride. It was a powerful international affirmation of the nation's
cultural significance and sovereignty. The prize forced the Polish
literary establishment and public to re-evaluate the novel they had once
scorned. Suddenly, the "brutal and immoral" story was hailed as a "great
national epic".<sup>22</sup> The journey of

*Chłopi* is a fascinating case study in how a nation's cultural identity
can be shaped by external validation. The novel became a cornerstone of
the Polish canon, in part, because the world first recognized it as a
masterpiece.

## Part II: Inside the World of Lipce Village

### A Universe in Four Seasons: The Rhythm of Life and Land

The genius of *Chłopi* lies in its revolutionary structure. The novel is
not organized around a linear plot but around the cyclical, eternal
rhythm of nature.

#### Nature as the Protagonist

The narrative is divided into four volumes, each named for a season:
*Jesień* (Autumn), *Zima* (Winter), *Wiosna* (Spring), and *Lato*
(Summer). This is not merely a backdrop; nature is the main character,
the force that dictates every aspect of life in Lipce. The work, the
rituals, the celebrations, and the inner emotional lives of the
villagers are all inextricably linked to the changing
seasons.<sup>5</sup> Autumn is for harvesting and preparing for the
cold; winter is a time of confinement, storytelling, and simmering
tensions; spring brings rebirth and renewed labor; summer is the season
of intense work and culminating passions. This structure elevates the
story from a simple village drama to a universal myth about humanity's
relationship with the earth.

#### The Sanctity of the Land

For the peasants of Lipce, land (*ziemia*) is everything. It is more
than property or a source of wealth; it is the foundation of identity,
social status, and life itself. Land is a sacred entity, and the fight
to possess and protect it drives every major conflict in the novel. The
bitter feud between the patriarch Maciej Boryna and his son Antek is not
just about a woman, Jagna, but about Antek's inheritance and his right
to his father's land.<sup>5</sup> Boryna’s marriage to Jagna is sealed
not with love, but with a contract granting her precious acres of his
best fields. The novel’s epic climax is the collective battle where the
entire village rises up to defend their communal forest from being sold
by the local manor lord.

#### The Polish Angle: Land and Nationhood

This intense, almost religious devotion to the land holds a uniquely
powerful meaning for Polish readers. The novel was written and set
during the time of the Partitions, when Poland as a sovereign state did
not exist, its territory carved up and controlled by the Russian,
Prussian, and Austro-Hungarian empires for over a century.<sup>30</sup>
In this context of national erasure, the peasants' fierce attachment to
their small, privately-owned plots of earth becomes a powerful metaphor
for the national struggle for survival and territory. Their fight to
protect the village forest is not just a local dispute over logging
rights; it is a symbolic act of resistance against a powerful, external
authority trying to take what is fundamentally theirs. For a nation
without political borders, the physical soil—the

*ziemia*—becomes the last, sacred bastion of identity. A Polish reader,
therefore, experiences these conflicts not just as a family drama but as
a deeply resonant allegory for the nation's historical trauma and its
enduring hope for independence.

### Decoding the Drama: Key Symbols and Hidden Meanings

Reymont weaves a rich tapestry of symbolism, transforming the realistic
story of Lipce into a universal myth.

#### Jagna: The Human Earth

Jagna is the novel's most complex and powerful symbol. Reymont
explicitly compares her soul to the "holy earth" (*ziemia
święta*).<sup>32</sup> Like the earth, she is fertile, beautiful,
passive, and profoundly connected to the forces of nature. She is acted
upon by external forces—the changing seasons, the desires of the men who
pursue her—and is driven by instinct and passion rather than the social
calculations that govern the rest of the village.<sup>3</sup> She is
also a classic

*femme fatale*, an outsider whose disruptive beauty and sexuality
threaten the established social order, leading to tragic conflict, much
like Helen of Troy in the ancient epics.

The interpretation of Jagna often depends on the cultural lens through
which she is viewed. For many modern readers, especially those with a
feminist perspective, she is a tragic hero: a free-spirited, artistic
woman who fights for her independence in a repressive, patriarchal
society, only to be destroyed by a community that fears her
agency.<sup>34</sup> Her brutal expulsion from the village is seen as
the ultimate act of misogynistic scapegoating. However, from a more
traditional, communitarian viewpoint, Jagna can be seen as a destructive
force. Her refusal to conform to her social duties—as a wife and a
member of the community—threatens the delicate social balance upon which
the entire village's survival depends.<sup>3</sup> The genius of the
novel is that it allows both of these interpretations to coexist,
refusing to offer a simple moral judgment.

#### Maciej Boryna: The Patriarch and the Sower

Maciej Boryna, the village's richest and most respected farmer, embodies
the old order.<sup>5</sup> He is a patriarch whose identity is
inseparable from the land he owns and works. His power, his pride, and
his very life force are drawn from the soil.

His death is one of the most iconic and symbolic scenes in all of Polish
literature. In his final moments, delirious with fever, he rises from
his deathbed and stumbles out into his fields under the moonlight.
There, he goes through the motions of sowing grain, his hands scooping
up handfuls of earth and scattering them as if planting a new
crop.<sup>17</sup> This powerful act symbolizes the eternal, cyclical
nature of life, death, and rebirth. The individual man, Boryna, dies,
but life itself, embodied by the land he has cultivated, continues. The
scene connects him to the universal archetype of the sower and directly
alludes to the biblical parable, elevating his death from a personal
tragedy to a moment of profound, mythical significance.

#### Literary Styles at Play

Reymont’s novel is a masterclass in stylistic synthesis, blending the
major artistic movements of his time to create a unique and powerful
narrative texture.<sup>17</sup>

- **Realism:** The foundation of the novel is its meticulous, almost
  ethnographic depiction of daily life. Reymont details the specific
  tasks of farm labor, the intricacies of social hierarchy, and the
  precise rituals of weddings, funerals, and religious holidays with
  unwavering accuracy.<sup>22</sup>

- **Naturalism:** Reymont does not shy away from the brutal realities of
  peasant life. He embraces the naturalist focus on base human
  instincts—lust, greed, violence—and the deterministic power of
  heredity and environment. The most famous naturalist scene is the
  harrowing sequence where the farmhand Kuba, suffering from a
  gangrenous leg, amputates it himself with an axe.<sup>5</sup>

- **Impressionism:** In stark contrast to the brutal naturalism, the
  novel's descriptions of nature are lyrical and painterly. Reymont uses
  an impressionistic style, focusing on the play of light, color, and
  atmosphere to capture the fleeting moods of the landscape.<sup>5</sup>

- **Symbolism:** As seen with Jagna and Boryna, Reymont uses characters,
  events, and the cyclical structure of the novel to represent
  universal, mythical ideas about life, death, and humanity's connection
  to the cosmos.<sup>17</sup>

### The Historical Backdrop: A Nation in Chains

While *Chłopi* feels timeless, it is deeply rooted in a specific and
painful moment in Polish history.

#### Setting the Scene

The novel is set in the fictional village of Lipce in the late 19th
century. Crucially, this is the area of Poland under Russian occupation,
known as the Russian Partition or Congress Poland.<sup>28</sup> Poland
as an independent nation did not exist at this time. Though the daily
life of the peasants is governed by the seasons and village customs, the
oppressive political reality is a constant, looming presence. Russian
officials enforce the law, the language of the courts is Russian, and
the threat of being arrested and sent to Siberia is very
real.<sup>2</sup>

#### ***Chłopomania*** ("Peasant-mania"): The Trend That Paved the Way

Reymont wrote *Chłopi* at the height of a fascinating cultural trend
among the Polish urban intelligentsia known as *chłopomania*, or
"peasant-mania".<sup>29</sup> With the Polish state and its traditional
aristocratic culture suppressed by the partitioning powers,
intellectuals began to look to the peasantry as the repository of the
"true" Polish spirit. They became fascinated with folk culture—the
music, the clothing, the dialects, and the customs—seeing it as an
authentic, untainted source of national identity. This trend often
manifested in a romantic and highly idealized view of rural life. It was
famously satirized in Stanisław Wyspiański's 1901 play

*Wesele* (*The Wedding*), in which educated men from Kraków marry
peasant women from a nearby village, celebrating a version of country
life that they do not truly understand.<sup>43</sup>

The phenomenon of *chłopomania* created a literary market that was
hungry for stories about peasant life, setting the stage for Reymont's
novel. However, the reason *Chłopi* endures while much other art from
this period feels dated is precisely because Reymont refused to conform
to the trend's romantic ideals. The initial outrage from readers of
*Tygodnik Ilustrowany* is the ultimate proof of this. They expected a
charming pastoral and were horrified when Reymont delivered a work of
unflinching realism, showing the peasants' cruelty, greed, and brutality
alongside their deep piety and powerful sense of community. Reymont
masterfully used the *chłopomania* trend as a Trojan horse. He gave the
intelligentsia the peasant story they thought they wanted, but filled it
with the complex, difficult, and often ugly truth they needed to see. In
doing so, he subverted their expectations and created a far more honest
and enduring national epic.

## Part III: The Polish Heartbeat: A National Treasure

In Poland, *Chłopi* is more than just a classic novel; it is a cultural
touchstone, a source of national pride, and a mandatory rite of passage
for generations of students.

### The Making of a Polish Epic

Following the 1924 Nobel Prize, *Chłopi* was elevated to the highest
echelon of the Polish literary canon, often described as a "national
epic" second only to Adam Mickiewicz's 19th-century masterpiece, *Pan
Tadeusz*.<sup>22</sup> The international recognition was a profound
moment for the newly reborn Polish nation, a powerful symbol that its
culture was vibrant, significant, and world-class.

The novel is treasured in Poland not only for its literary merit but
also as an invaluable ethnographic time capsule. It meticulously
documents the world of the 19th-century Polish village, preserving a
rich tapestry of folk traditions, dialects, social customs, and
religious rituals that have largely vanished from modern life. Reymont
describes wedding ceremonies like the *oczepiny* (the ritual capping of
the bride), holiday traditions like *Śmigus-dyngus* ("Wet Monday" at
Easter), and the daily rhythms of work like cabbage pickling and wool
spinning with the precision of an anthropologist. For many Poles,
reading the novel is a way to connect with the lives of their ancestors.

#### Official Recognition: UNESCO Memory of the World

This status as a national treasure was officially cemented in 2024. To
mark the 100th anniversary of Reymont's Nobel Prize, the original
manuscript of *Chłopi*, which is preserved at the Ossolineum National
Institute in Wrocław, was inscribed on the Polish National List of the
UNESCO Memory of the World Programme.<sup>46</sup> This prestigious
recognition places the manuscript alongside other foundational documents
of Polish culture, such as the manuscript of

*Pan Tadeusz* and the literary legacies of Henryk Sienkiewicz and
Juliusz Słowacki, formally acknowledging its outstanding and enduring
importance to the nation's heritage.<sup>46</sup>

### Required Reading: ***Chłopi*** in the Polish Classroom

For decades, *Chłopi* has been a *lektura obowiązkowa*—mandatory
reading—in the Polish high school curriculum.<sup>3</sup> This has
forged a complex and often fraught relationship between the novel and
the Polish people. While it is revered as a classic, for countless
students it has been a source of dread, a monumental challenge due to
its sheer length, dense descriptions, and difficult, stylized
dialect.<sup>49</sup>

#### The ***Matura*** Exam

The novel's central place in the education system is solidified by its
frequent appearance on the *Matura*, Poland's comprehensive national
high school exit exam, which is a crucial gateway to university
education.

- **Past Requirements:** Until the 2024 exam, students were required to
  have a thorough knowledge of the entire first volume, *Jesień*
  (Autumn).

- **Current Requirements:** Beginning with the 2025 exam, this
  requirement has been relaxed. Students now only need to be familiar
  with "selected fragments" of the novel, a change intended to make the
  text less intimidating.<sup>51</sup>

- **Typical Exam Questions:** Oral and written exam questions on
  *Chłopi* typically focus on its major themes, such as the role of
  nature in human life, the function of tradition and custom in society,
  the dynamics of generational conflict, and the moral code of the
  village community.

Recently, the Polish government initiated a broad "slimming down" of the
national curriculum, aiming to reduce the overall content by about 20%.
As part of this reform, *Chłopi* is now among the classic texts for
which teachers have the discretion to teach only excerpts rather than
the full volume. This move has ignited a national debate about
educational standards, with proponents arguing it makes dense classics
more accessible to modern students, while critics fear it represents a
dumbing down of Polish literary education.

### The Polish Gaze: How Poles Read ***Chłopi***

The reception of *Chłopi* within Poland is far from monolithic; it is
shaped by age, experience, and the context in which it is read.

#### Data from Lubimyczytac.pl

An analysis of reader data from Lubimyczytac.pl, Poland's largest and
most influential book portal (the domestic equivalent of Goodreads),
reveals this complex picture. The most popular complete edition of the
novel holds a modest average rating of 6.8 out of 10 from over 14,125
ratings. However, when rated as individual volumes, the scores are often
significantly higher; for example, the fourth volume, *Lato* (Summer),
has an average rating of 8.4 out of 10.

This discrepancy points directly to the "forced reading" effect of the
school curriculum. Many of the lower ratings and negative reviews come
from students who found the book a difficult and tedious assignment,
often struggling with the archaic language and dialect.<sup>50</sup> In
stark contrast, a large number of the highest-rated reviews are from
adults who are rereading the novel years or even decades after leaving
school. These readers frequently express a newfound and profound
appreciation for the book's beauty, psychological depth, and stunningly
realistic portrayal of a lost world, calling it a "masterpiece" they
were too young to appreciate before.<sup>54</sup>

#### Generational and Cultural Divides

This data reflects a significant generational divide. For older Poles,
particularly those with family roots in the countryside, the novel can
be a deeply nostalgic and authentic connection to their heritage. For
many younger, urban Poles, however, the world of Lipce can feel as alien
as a distant planet, with the stylized dialect posing a major barrier to
entry. The wildly successful 2023 film adaptation has played a crucial
role in bridging this gap, its stunning visuals and modern soundtrack
making the story accessible and exciting for a new generation that might
otherwise never have engaged with the original text.

## Part IV: The Global Journey and Modern Rebirth

### From Lipce to the World: A History of Translation

The journey of *Chłopi* from a Polish village to the global stage is a
story of persistence, cultural diplomacy, and the transformative power
of translation.

#### The German Breakthrough

The novel's international breakthrough was its German translation, *Die
Bauern*, published in 1912. The translator was Jan Paweł Kaczkowski, who
used the French-sounding pseudonym Jean Paul d'Ardeschah to appeal to
the German bourgeoisie's affinity for French culture and to bypass their
anti-Polish sentiments. The translation was initially a commercial
disaster, selling a mere 93 copies in its first year. The publisher,
Eugen Diederichs, was so incensed that he wrote a public letter shaming
the German nobility for their "intellectual laziness" in ignoring a
masterpiece of world literature. The stunt worked. The aristocracy took
notice, sales climbed to over 5,000, and the book was declared a "master
translation". During World War I, it even became required reading for
German soldiers stationed on the Eastern Front, serving as a vital
source of knowledge about Polish culture. Most importantly, the critical
acclaim for the German version was a direct and decisive factor in the
Swedish Academy's decision to award Reymont the 1924 Nobel Prize.

#### Global Reach and the Challenge of Translation

The Nobel Prize opened the floodgates for global translations. The novel
has since been translated into at least 27 languages, cementing its
place in the canon of world literature.<sup>5</sup> The first French
translation appeared in 1925, the year after the prize. The first
complete English translation, by Michael H. Dziewicki, was published by
Alfred A. Knopf between 1924 and 1925.<sup>58</sup> In 2022, spurred by
the production of the new animated film, Penguin Classics released a
celebrated new English translation by Anna Zaranko, praised for
capturing the dynamism and fluidity of Reymont's original
prose.<sup>60</sup>

The greatest challenge for any translator of *Chłopi* is the language
itself. Reymont did not simply record an existing peasant dialect; he
created a stylized, artistic language—a *patois* that blended elements
from various regions to achieve a more universal, poetic
effect.<sup>15</sup> This makes a literal, one-to-one translation
impossible. As Anna Zaranko noted, her approach was to use "colourful
informal speech" without tying it to a specific British dialect, aiming
to convey the spirit and cadence of the original rather than attempting
a flawed imitation. This highlights the inevitable "lost in translation"
dilemma: the unique linguistic music of Reymont's Polish is a core part
of the novel's genius, and it can only ever be approximated, never
perfectly replicated, in another language.

| Language | Year of First Known Translation | Translator(s) | Title in Translation | Notes on Reception/Significance |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| German | 1912 | Jean Paul d'Ardeschah | *Die Bauern* | Critically important for the 1924 Nobel Prize decision. |
| Czech | 1920-1921 | Not specified | *Chłopi; román* | Early translation showing regional interest. |
| English | 1924-1925 | Michael Henry Dziewicki | *The Peasants* | First complete English translation by Knopf. |
| French | 1925 | Franck L. Schoell | *Les Paysans* | Published the year after the Nobel Prize.<sup>54</sup> |
| Hebrew | 1928 | Not specified | Not specified | Found a receptive audience in Palestine due to its focus on soil cultivation and community. |
| Lithuanian | 1953 | Fabijonas Neveravičius | *Kaimiečiai: Žiema* | Example of translation into a neighboring language. |
| Romanian | 1986 | Not specified | *Țăranii A doua parte - Iarna* | Translation of the "Winter" volume. |
| Russian | 1993 | Not specified | *Мужики* | Translation of the "Winter" volume. |
| Arabic | 2019 | Kpro Lahdo | <span dir="rtl">أربعاء الرماد</span> | Translation of the "Winter" volume. |
| English (New) | 2022 | Anna Zaranko | *The Peasants* | New Penguin Classics edition spurred by the 2023 film.<sup>60</sup> |

### From Page to Screen: A Century of Adaptations

*Chłopi* has had a rich and varied life on screen, with each adaptation
reinterpreting the classic story for a new era.

#### A Cinematic History

- **1922 Silent Film:** The very first film adaptation was a
  black-and-white silent movie directed by Eugeniusz
  Modzelewski.<sup>5</sup> It was a testament to the novel's early
  cultural power. Tragically, in a loss for Polish film history, all
  known copies of the film were destroyed and lost during the
  devastation of World War II.<sup>5</sup>

- **1972-73 TV Series and Film:** For generations of Poles, the
  definitive screen version of *Chłopi* was the one directed by Jan
  Rybkowski. He first created a sprawling, 13-episode television series
  in 1972, which allowed the novel's epic scope to unfold in
  detail.<sup>5</sup> This was followed in 1973 by a condensed feature
  film version.<sup>5</sup> Starring Władysław Hańcza as Boryna and
  Emilia Krakowska as Jagna, this adaptation became an iconic piece of
  Polish television, deeply embedding its visual interpretation of the
  characters and the village of Lipce into the national consciousness.

- **2023 Painted Animation:** The most recent adaptation, directed by
  the husband-and-wife team DK and Hugh Welchman (creators of the
  Oscar-nominated *Loving Vincent*), brought *Chłopi* to a new global
  audience in a visually revolutionary way.

#### Deep Dive: The 2023 Film Phenomenon

The 2023 film was not just an adaptation; it was an artistic event that
captured the world's attention.

- **The Technique:** The film was created using the painstaking
  technique of painted animation. The entire movie was first shot as a
  live-action feature with a cast of prominent Polish
  actors.<sup>1</sup> Then, a team of over 100 painters and artists from
  studios in Poland, Serbia, Ukraine, and Lithuania began the monumental
  task of hand-painting every single one of the film's 40,000+ frames as
  an oil painting on canvas.<sup>1</sup> The Ukrainian artists and their
  families had to be evacuated from Kyiv during the war, adding another
  layer of drama and resilience to the film's production story.

- **The Aesthetic:** The film's visual language is a direct homage to
  the art of the "Young Poland" (*Młoda Polska*) movement, the artistic
  period in which Reymont wrote.<sup>1</sup> The filmmakers deliberately
  modeled scenes and landscapes on famous Polish paintings of the era.
  The works of artists like Józef Chełmoński (whose iconic paintings
  "Indian Summer" and "Storks" are explicitly recreated), Leon
  Wyczółkowski, and Julian Fałat serve as the visual blueprint for the
  entire film, creating a world where the literature and the art of the
  period merge into one seamless, breathtaking experience.<sup>1</sup>

- **Global Reception:** The film had its world premiere at the
  prestigious Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) in September
  2023, where it was met with significant buzz.<sup>67</sup> It was
  quickly acquired by Sony Pictures Classics for distribution in North
  and Latin America, the Middle East, and other key markets, ensuring a
  global theatrical run. It was selected as Poland's official submission
  for the Best International Feature Film at the Academy Awards.
  Critical reviews were often effusive about the film's stunning visual
  artistry, calling it an "awe-inspiring" and "unparalleled" cinematic
  experience.<sup>6</sup> However, some critics were more divided on the
  narrative, arguing that the abridged story felt rushed or that the
  film prioritized "style over substance".<sup>72</sup>

### The 21st-Century Peasant: Viral Moments and Modern Relevance

Just when it seemed *Chłopi* might remain a revered but niche classic,
it found a powerful new life in the most modern of arenas: social media.

#### TikTok Takes Over

The 2023 film's soundtrack, a vibrant fusion of traditional Slavic folk
music and modern production by composer Łukasz "L.U.C." Rostkowski,
became an unexpected viral sensation. The lead track, "Jesień – Tańcuj"
("Autumn – Dance"), featuring artists like Kayah and Laboratorium
Pieśni, exploded on TikTok.<sup>8</sup> A dance trend emerged, with
users across the globe creating millions of videos set to the song's
infectious, high-energy rhythm. This viral moment did more than just
promote the film; it introduced the world of

*Chłopi*—its aesthetic, its energy, its connection to Slavic folklore—to
a massive global youth audience that had likely never heard of Władysław
Reymont or his Nobel Prize-winning novel.

#### Modern Thematic Readings

The renewed interest in *Chłopi* has brought its timeless themes into
sharp focus, allowing them to be re-interpreted through the lens of
contemporary social issues.

- **Feminism and Patriarchy:** Jagna's story resonates powerfully in the
  post-#MeToo era. She is now widely seen as a symbol of female agency
  and artistic spirit being crushed by a rigid patriarchy. Her story is
  read as a powerful critique of societal double standards, the policing
  of women's sexuality, and the brutal consequences faced by women who
  defy traditional roles.<sup>35</sup>

- **Social Justice and Inequality:** The novel's clear-eyed depiction of
  the social hierarchy within Lipce—from wealthy, land-owning farmers
  like Boryna down to the impoverished, landless laborers known as
  *komornicy*—provides a historical parallel to modern discussions about
  economic inequality, class struggle, and the exploitation of
  labor.<sup>25</sup>

- **Environmentalism:** In an age of climate crisis and ecological
  anxiety, the peasants' profound, cyclical, and deeply spiritual
  connection to the land offers a poignant contrast to modern society's
  detachment from the natural world. The novel's central theme of life
  being governed by the rhythms of nature is increasingly read as an
  environmental allegory, a call to remember the harmony between humans
  and the earth.<sup>24</sup>

The modern power of *Chłopi* lies in the unresolved tension it presents
between the needs of the community and the desires of the individual. In
the 19th-century world of Lipce, the survival of the collective was
paramount. Individual passions, like Jagna's, were seen as a threat to
social cohesion and were brutally suppressed for the good of the group.
Today's Western culture, particularly for its younger generations, often
prizes radical individualism and personal freedom above all else.
*Chłopi* forces a modern reader into an uncomfortable but vital
confrontation. We instinctively root for Jagna, the free-spirited
individual, yet the novel forces us to understand the cold, hard logic
(however brutal) of the collective that condemns her. It pushes us to
ask difficult questions: What do we owe our communities? What are the
limits of personal freedom? Is the village's "brutal scapegoating" of
one woman an ancient precursor to the dynamics of modern online shaming
and cancel culture? The enduring relevance of *Chłopi* is not that it
provides easy answers, but that its raw, honest portrayal of this
eternal human conflict feels more urgent than ever.<sup>4</sup>

## Part V: Your Guide to ***Chłopi***

### Quotes That Hit Different

Whether you're looking for a savage comeback, a deep thought for your
journal, or the perfect yearbook quote, the world of *Chłopi* has you
covered. Here are some of the most powerful lines, in the original
Polish and in English translation.

#### For Savage Burns and Iconic Comebacks

- **Original:** *Nie dla psa kiełbasa, nie dla prosiąt miód.*

  - **Translation:** "Sausage is not for a dog, nor is honey for
    piglets."

  - **Context:** Spoken by Jagna's calculating mother, Dominikowa. It's
    a classic, brutal put-down for anyone getting too ambitious or
    reaching for something they don't deserve.

- **Original:** Jagna's fiery speech to her rival, Hanka. <sup>78</sup>

  - **Translation:** "He loved me—loved me more than tongue can tell!
    And you he shrank from, even to loathing; his gorge, poor man! rose
    at the thought of your love... at the memory of you, he would spit
    with sheer disgust!...So weigh my words, and never dare to think
    yourself my equal."

  - **Context:** The ultimate verbal takedown, delivered by Jagna when
    confronted by Antek's wife, Hanka. It's a moment of pure, unfiltered
    passion and cruelty.

#### For Existential Dread and Deep Thoughts

- **Original:** *Jako ten ślepy kamień pod wodą głęboką żyjesz,
  człowieku... W ciemnicy, człowieku, orzesz żywota rolę i płacz
  zasiewasz, ten trud, ten ból... I w błocie tarzasz gwiezdną duszę,
  człowieku, w błocie...*

  - **Translation:** "You live like a blind stone under deep water, O
    man... In darkness, O man, you plow the field of life and you sow
    tears, this toil, this pain... And in the mud you roll your starry
    soul, O man, in the mud..."

  - **Context:** A poetic and bleak reflection on the human condition,
    capturing the endless toil and hidden spiritual depth of the
    peasant's life.

#### For Yearbook Quotes and Life Mottos

- **Original:** *...jak się sam człowiek nie przyłoży, to mu i Pan Jezus
  nie dołoży.*

  - **Translation:** "If a man doesn't put in the effort himself, even
    the Lord Jesus won't add to it."

  - **Context:** A pragmatic piece of folk wisdom that champions
    self-reliance and hard work. It's the 19th-century peasant version
    of "God helps those who help themselves."

- **Original:** *W gromadzie żyję, to i z gromadą trzymam!*

  - **Translation:** "I live in the community, so I stand with the
    community!"

  - **Context:** Antek's justification for turning on Jagna. It's a
    stark and powerful expression of the novel's central theme: the
    ultimate priority of the collective over the individual.

### How to Spot Good Sources (A Student's Guide)

Navigating the world of information to write a paper or just win an
argument requires knowing who to trust. Here’s a quick guide to sorting
the good, the bad, and the ugly when researching a classic like
*Chłopi*.

#### 🟢 Trust These Sources: The Gold Standard

These are your most reliable sources. They have been vetted by experts
and are built on verifiable facts.

- **University Websites and Presses (.edu,.ac.uk,.edu.pl):** Academic
  institutions are in the business of knowledge. Books and articles
  published by university presses have undergone rigorous peer review.

- **Peer-Reviewed Journals:** These are academic publications where
  articles are reviewed by a panel of experts in the field before being
  published. Look for databases like JSTOR, Project MUSE, or Polish
  databases like CEJSH and BazHum.

- **Major Museums and Cultural Institutions:** Organizations like the
  British Library, the Library of Congress, or Poland's National
  Ossolineum Institute provide access to primary sources and
  expert-curated information.

- **Polish Trusted Sources:** For *Chłopi*, websites like **Culture.pl**
  <sup>11</sup>, the  
  **Instytut Książki** (Book Institute) , and the digital collections of
  the **Biblioteka Narodowa** (National Library) at **polona.pl**
  <sup>80</sup> are top-tier resources.

#### 🟡 Use With Caution: Check the Receipts

These sources can be useful starting points, but you should always
verify their claims with a trusted source.

- **Wikipedia:** An excellent place to get a general overview of a
  topic. However, it can be edited by anyone. **Pro Tip:** Don't cite
  Wikipedia itself; scroll to the bottom and check the sources listed in
  the "References" section. Those are often high-quality links you can
  use.

- **Popular Blogs and YouTube Video Essays:** There is some fantastic
  analysis out there, but the quality varies wildly. Check the creator's
  credentials. Are they a literature professor or just a fan? Do they
  cite their sources in the description?

- **Polish Sources:** Websites like **Lubimyczytać.pl** are Poland's
  version of Goodreads.<sup>54</sup> They are fantastic for gauging
  public opinion and finding reader reviews, but they are not a source
  for objective facts.

#### 🔴 Avoid These: The Danger Zone

These sources are often unreliable, inaccurate, or designed to mislead.

- **Anonymous Posts and Unverified Forums:** Information without a clear
  author or source is worthless.

- **Clickbait Sites with Lots of Ads:** These sites are designed to get
  clicks, not to provide accurate information.

- **AI-Generated Content without Human Verification:** AI tools can be
  helpful for brainstorming, but they can also "hallucinate" or make up
  facts and sources. Never trust AI-generated information without
  confirming it yourself.

- **Polish Warning:** Be very wary of student "cheat sheet" websites
  like **Bryka.pl** and similar sites.<sup>38</sup> While popular for
  quick summaries, they are notorious for containing errors,
  oversimplifications, and outright inaccuracies. Using them for a
  serious paper is a recipe for a bad grade.

The Ultimate Pro Tip: The Rule of Three

If a fact or claim sounds particularly wild, surprising, or too good to
be true, make it a rule to find at least three different reliable
sources that confirm it before you consider it verified. This is the
core principle of good research and the best defense against
misinformation.

### **Bibliography**

#### **A. Primary Sources**

Reymont, Władysław Stanisław. *Chłopi: Powieść Współczesna. Cz. 1,
Jesień*. Gebethner i Wolff, 1904. Digital copy available at Polona.pl.
\[Primary source\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

Reymont, Władysław Stanisław. "Autobiographical Note." In *Nobel
Lectures, Literature 1901-1967*, edited by Horst Frenz, Elsevier
Publishing Company, 1969. \[Primary source\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### **B. Secondary Sources (Organized by Language)**

##### **Polish Sources**

"Chłopi." *Lubimyczytać.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\]
⭐⭐⭐

"Chłopi, tom 1." *Lubimyczytać.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
\[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐

"Chłopi, część czwarta - Lato." *Lubimyczytać.pl*, Accessed October 20,
2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐

"Cytaty z książki Chłopi." *Lubimyczytać.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
\[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐

"Cytaty Władysław Stanisław Reymont." *Lubimyczytać.pl*, Accessed
October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐

"Chłopomania." *Bryk.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐

"Chłopomania w Weselu." *Poezja.org*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
\[Polish\] ⭐⭐

"Obraz wsi, który proponuje literatura Młodej Polski." *Bryk.pl*,
Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐

"Chłopi - najważniejsze aspekty powieści Władysława Reymonta."
*Bryk.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐

"Chłopi Władysław Stanisław Reymont - opracowanie." *Matura.greg.pl*,
Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐

"Chłopi - Reymont." *Aleklasa.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\]
⭐⭐

"Chłopi - matura." *Aleklasa.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\]
⭐⭐

"Matura ustna - Chłopi." *Babaodpolskiego.pl*, October 20, 2024.
\[Polish\] ⭐⭐

"Chłopi - matura 2025." *Otouczelnie.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
\[Polish\] ⭐⭐

"3 ciekawostki o Chłopach i Reymoncie, które warto znać."
*Babaodpolskiego.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐

"Ludomania." *Aleklasa.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐

"Rękopis 'Chłopów' Władysława Stanisława Reymonta na liście UNESCO."
*Rynek-ksiazki.pl*, June 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Rękopis 'Chłopów' Władysława Stanisława Reymonta na liście UNESCO."
*Lubimyczytać.pl*, June 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"120 lat temu ukazał się pierwszy odcinek powieści 'Chłopi'." *Instytut
Książki*, January 18, 2022. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Chłopi - powieść przełamująca tabu." *Histmag.org*, October 13, 2023.
\[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

Kowalski, Robert. "Władysław Reymont, 'Chłopi'." *Culture.pl*, Last
updated September 15, 2023. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Władysław Reymont - Życie i twórczość." *Culture.pl*, Accessed October
20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Muzeum Regionalne im. Wł. St. Reymonta w Lipcach Reymontowskich." *BIP
Starostwo Powiatowe w Skierniewicach*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
\[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Muzeum Regionalne im. Wł. St. Reymonta." *Nocowanie.pl*, Accessed
October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐

"Muzeum Regionalne im. Wł. St. Reymonta w Lipcach Reymontowskich."
*Lipcereymontowskie.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Muzeum Regionalne im. Władysława St. Reymonta w Lipcach
Reymontowskich." *Wikipedia*, Accessed October 20, 2024. \[Polish\]
⭐⭐⭐

Fijałkiewicz, Michał. "Is culture translatable? On the Polish novel
Chłopi by Władysław Stanisław Reymont translated into German by Jean
Paul d'Ardeschah as a dialogue of Polish and German cultures." *Prace
Językoznawcze*, vol. 27, no. 2, 2025, pp. 167-184.\[Polish/English\]
⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

##### **English Sources**

"The Peasants." *Wikipedia*, Accessed October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

"Władysław Reymont." *Wikipedia*, Accessed October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

"The Peasants (1973 film)." *Wikipedia*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
⭐⭐⭐

"The Peasants (2023 film)." *Wikipedia*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
⭐⭐⭐

"The Wedding (1901 play)." *Wikipedia*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
⭐⭐⭐

"The Peasants - Wladyslaw Reymont." *Culture.pl*, Last updated September
15, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Wladyslaw Stanislaw Reymont." *Culture.pl*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"The Peasants." *Britannica*, Accessed October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Wladyslaw Reymont." *Britannica*, Accessed October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Władysław Reymont – Biographical." *NobelPrize.org*, The Nobel
Foundation, 1924. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Władysław Reymont – Facts." *NobelPrize.org*, The Nobel Foundation,
1924. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Analysis of Wladyslaw Reymont’s The Peasants." *Literariness.org*,
August 3, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

"Wladyslaw Reymont (1867-1925)." *Authorscalendar.info*, Accessed
October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

"New book release: The Peasants by Wladyslaw Reymont translated by Anna
Zaranko." *Instytut Polski London*, December 29, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Polish writer Reymont's 'The Peasants' published in UK." *Polskie
Radio*, January 2, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"The 100th Anniversary of Władysław Reymont's Nobel Prize for The
Peasants." *Cultureave.com*, Accessed October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Poland introduces 'slimmed-down' school curriculum cutting content by
20%." *Notes from Poland*, July 1, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Poland's forgotten Nobel winner who wrote Animal Farm 20 years before
Orwell." *Notes from Poland*, October 24, 2019. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

Green, John. "Many and Feudal." *Morning Star*, January 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

Phillips, Ursula. "RivetingReviews: Ursula Phillips reviews The Peasants
by Wladyslaw Reymont." *European Literature Network*, January 12, 2023.
⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Władysław Reymont." *EBSCO Research Starters*, Accessed October 20,
2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"Wladyslaw Stanislaw Reymont." *Encyclopedia.com*, Accessed October 20,
2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

Welchman, Hugh. "Introduction." In *The Peasants* by Władysław Reymont,
translated by Anna Zaranko, Penguin Classics, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

"The Peasants (Chłopi) Series by Władysław Stanisław Reymont."
*Goodreads*, Accessed October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

"All Editions of Chłopi." *Goodreads*, Accessed October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

"All Editions of The Peasants." *Goodreads*, Accessed October 20, 2024.
⭐⭐⭐

"Quotes from Chłopi." *Goodreads*, Accessed October 20, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

##### **Multimedia and Digital Sources**

*The Peasants (Chłopi)*. Directed by DK Welchman and Hugh Welchman,
BreakThru Films, 2023. \[Film\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

*Chłopi*. Directed by Jan Rybkowski, Zespół Filmowy "Kadr", 1973.
\[Film\] ⭐⭐⭐⭐

*Chłopi*. TV Series, Directed by Jan Rybkowski, Telewizja Polska, 1972.
⭐⭐⭐⭐

Welchman, DK, and Hugh Welchman. "A painterly vision of Władysław
Reymont’s 'The Peasants'." Interview by Joanna Sokołowska-Gwizdka.
*Austin Polish Film Festival*, October 19, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"THE PEASANTS \| Official Trailer (2023)." *Sony Pictures Classics*,
YouTube, September 13, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"THE PEASANTS \| Official Teaser." *New Europe Film Sales*, YouTube,
June 14, 2022. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

COOLturoznawca (@dobrywteklocki). "Odkryj fascynujący świat filmu
Chłopi..." *TikTok*, October 13, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

Kultura Wysoka (@kultura.wysoka). "wiem, że piosenka buja, ale reymont
to sie chyba w grobie przewraca." *TikTok*, October 20, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

Karol Paciorek (@karolpaciorek). "reymont \#booktok." *TikTok*, October
17, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

Wydawnictwo Agora (@wydawnictwo_agora). "Ekskluzywne wydanie
'Chłopów'..." *TikTok*, November 3, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

"Polish peasant culture." *Reddit*, r/poland, 2012. ⭐⭐

"What are your country's literary masterpieces?" *Reddit*, r/history,
2015. ⭐⭐

"\[MOVIE\] The Peasants / Chlopi (2023)." *Reddit*, r/PeriodDramas,
2024. ⭐⭐

"Are there books everyone in your country has to read for school?"
*Reddit*, r/AskEurope, 2021. ⭐⭐

Hunt, Wesley. "The Peasants (Chłopi): Film Review." *Loud and Clear
Reviews*, September 9, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

Koralewska, Agata. "International Spotlight: Chłopi (2023) by DK & Hugh
Welchman." *Exepose*, March 15, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐

"'The Peasants' Review: A Heart-Breaking Painting Crafted in Rich
Color." *FilmSpeak*, September 13, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐

Clements, Sara. "'The Peasants'." *Next Best Picture*, September 13,
2023. ⭐⭐⭐

"The Peasants." *In Review Online*, December 7, 2023. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

"The Beautiful Community and Brutal Scapegoating in The Peasants."
*Christ and Pop Culture*, February 23, 2024. ⭐⭐⭐⭐

#### **C. Missing Sources Note**

- **Quantitative Data on Global Reception:** While there are many
  qualitative reviews and historical accounts, precise sales figures for
  *Chłopi* in most non-Polish markets over the decades are difficult to
  find in accessible sources.

- **Early Translations (Non-European):** Information on the earliest
  translations into languages like Japanese, Chinese, or Hindi is
  scarce. While the book has been translated into at least 27 languages,
  the detailed history for many of these is not well-documented in
  English or Polish academic sources.

- **LGBTQ+ and Diverse Readings:** Academic scholarship specifically
  analyzing the novel through an LGBTQ+ lens or focusing on disability
  representation is not widely available, reflecting a gap in older
  literary criticism that future scholarship may address.

- **Fan Culture Metrics:** While the TikTok trend is well-documented,
  specific data on fanfiction (e.g., number of stories on platforms like
  AO3) or organized fan communities for the novel (as opposed to the
  film) is limited, suggesting a more informal or nascent fan culture.

#### Cytowane prace

1.  Polish Book "The Peasants" has a worldwide renaissance, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://polishatheart.com/polish-book-the-peasants-has-a-worldwide-renaissance</u>](https://polishatheart.com/polish-book-the-peasants-has-a-worldwide-renaissance)

2.  THE PEASANTS (Chłopi) \| - One Guys Opinion, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.oneguysopinion.com/the-peasants-chlopi/</u>](https://www.oneguysopinion.com/the-peasants-chlopi/)

3.  “The Peasants” movie review – A woman trapped in society (and an oil
    painting), otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.careersinpoland.com/article/customs/the-peasants-review-a-time-old-tale-of-a-woman-trapped-in-a-society-and-an-oil-painting</u>](https://www.careersinpoland.com/article/customs/the-peasants-review-a-time-old-tale-of-a-woman-trapped-in-a-society-and-an-oil-painting)

4.  The Beautiful Community and Brutal Scapegoating in The Peasants -
    Christ and Pop Culture, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://christandpopculture.com/beautiful-community-brutal-scapegoating-peasants/</u>](https://christandpopculture.com/beautiful-community-brutal-scapegoating-peasants/)

5.  The Peasants - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Peasants</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Peasants)

6.  THE PEASANTS (CHLOPI) \| AFI FEST - American Film Institute,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://fest.afi.com/2023/world-cinema-2023/the-peasants/</u>](https://fest.afi.com/2023/world-cinema-2023/the-peasants/)

7.  Chłopi - Recenzja filmu i analiza kulturowa - TikTok, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@dobrywteklocki/video/7290507027774737697</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@dobrywteklocki/video/7290507027774737697)

8.  \#chłopi \#Jagna \#kobieta \#słowiańska \#słowiańskieklimaty \|
    TikTok, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@kultura.wysoka/video/7296055773044444448</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@kultura.wysoka/video/7296055773044444448)

9.  Jak powstał film „Chłopi”? Rozmowa z Mirosławem Baką - TikTok,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.tiktok.com/@karolpaciorek/video/7293578377976499488?lang=en</u>](https://www.tiktok.com/@karolpaciorek/video/7293578377976499488?lang=en)

10. The Peasants \| work by Reymont - Britannica, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Peasants</u>](https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Peasants)

11. Władysław Stanisław Reymont - Biography \| Artist \| Culture.pl,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/artist/wladyslaw-stanislaw-reymont</u>](https://culture.pl/en/artist/wladyslaw-stanislaw-reymont)

12. 3 ciekawostki o „Chłopach” i Reymoncie, które warto znać! - Baba
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://babaodpolskiego.pl/3-ciekawostki-o-chlopach-i-reymoncie-ktore-warto-znac/</u>](https://babaodpolskiego.pl/3-ciekawostki-o-chlopach-i-reymoncie-ktore-warto-znac/)

13. Władysław Reymont – Biographical - NobelPrize.org, otwierano: lipca
    25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/literature/1924/reymont/biographical/</u>](https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/literature/1924/reymont/biographical/)

14. Władysław Reymont - Encounters with Polish Literature - S3E8 -
    YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KHHCf9cmNTY</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KHHCf9cmNTY)

15. Wladyslaw Reymont - Authors' Calendar, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>http://authorscalendar.info/reymont.htm</u>](http://authorscalendar.info/reymont.htm)

16. Władysław Reymont Facts for Kids - Kids encyclopedia facts - Kiddle,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://kids.kiddle.co/W%C5%82adys%C5%82aw_Reymont</u>](https://kids.kiddle.co/W%C5%82adys%C5%82aw_Reymont)

17. Matura - język polski, egzamin pisemny. Materiały do książki -
    Wydawnictwo GREG, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://matura.greg.pl/polski,chlopi-wladyslaw-stanislaw-reymont-opracowanie</u>](https://matura.greg.pl/polski,chlopi-wladyslaw-stanislaw-reymont-opracowanie)

18. Chłopi – Władysław Reymont \| AleKlasa, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://aleklasa.pl/liceum/c300-lektury/chlopi-reymont</u>](https://aleklasa.pl/liceum/c300-lektury/chlopi-reymont)

19. 120 lat temu ukazał się pierwszy odcinek powieści ... - Instytut
    Książki, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://instytutksiazki.pl/aktualnosci,2,120-lat-temu-ukazal-sie-pierwszy-odcinek-powiesci-%E2%80%9Echlopi%E2%80%9D,7162.html</u>](https://instytutksiazki.pl/aktualnosci,2,120-lat-temu-ukazal-sie-pierwszy-odcinek-powiesci-%E2%80%9Echlopi%E2%80%9D,7162.html)

20. The Peasants (Chłopi) Series by Władysław Stanisław Reymont -
    Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/series/162361-the-peasants-ch-opi</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/series/162361-the-peasants-ch-opi)

21. (PDF) Is culture translatable? On the Polish novel "Chłopi" by
    Władysław Stanisław Reymont translated into German by Jean Paul
    d'Ardeschah as a dialogue of Polish and German cultures -
    ResearchGate, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.researchgate.net/publication/393096202_Is_culture_translatable_On_the_Polish_novel_Chlopi_by_Wladyslaw_Stanislaw_Reymont_translated_into_German_by_Jean_Paul_d'Ardeschah_as_a_dialogue_of_Polish_and_German_cultures</u>](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/393096202_Is_culture_translatable_On_the_Polish_novel_Chlopi_by_Wladyslaw_Stanislaw_Reymont_translated_into_German_by_Jean_Paul_d'Ardeschah_as_a_dialogue_of_Polish_and_German_cultures)

22. Władysław Reymont, "Chłopi" \| \#literatura - Culture.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/pl/dzielo/wladyslaw-reymont-chlopi</u>](https://culture.pl/pl/dzielo/wladyslaw-reymont-chlopi)

23. The 100th Anniversary of Władysław Reymont's Nobel Prize for "The
    Peasants - Austin Polish Film Festival, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.austinpolishfilm.com/apff-blog/2024/10/23/the-100th-anniversary-of-wadysaw-reymonts-nobel-prize-for-the-peasants</u>](https://www.austinpolishfilm.com/apff-blog/2024/10/23/the-100th-anniversary-of-wadysaw-reymonts-nobel-prize-for-the-peasants)

24. The 100th Anniversary of Władysław Reymont's Nobel Prize for "The
    Peasants" - Culture Avenue, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.cultureave.com/the-100th-anniversary-of-wladyslaw-reymonts-nobel-prize-for-the-peasants/</u>](https://www.cultureave.com/the-100th-anniversary-of-wladyslaw-reymonts-nobel-prize-for-the-peasants/)

25. Analysis of Władysław Reymont's The Peasants - Literary Theory and
    Criticism, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://literariness.org/2023/08/03/analysis-of-wladyslaw-reymonts-the-peasants/</u>](https://literariness.org/2023/08/03/analysis-of-wladyslaw-reymonts-the-peasants/)

26. The Peasants - Penguin Books, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/444052/the-peasants-by-reymont-wladyslaw/9780241524244</u>](https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/444052/the-peasants-by-reymont-wladyslaw/9780241524244)

27. Poland's forgotten Nobel winner who wrote “Animal Farm” before
    Orwell, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://notesfrompoland.com/2019/10/24/polands-forgotten-nobel-winner-who-wrote-animal-farm-20-years-before-orwell/</u>](https://notesfrompoland.com/2019/10/24/polands-forgotten-nobel-winner-who-wrote-animal-farm-20-years-before-orwell/)

28. RivetingReviews: Ursula Phillips reviews THE PEASANTS by Władysław
    Reymont, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.eurolitnetwork.com/rivetingreviews-ursula-phillips-reviews-the-peasants-by-wladyslaw-reymont/</u>](https://www.eurolitnetwork.com/rivetingreviews-ursula-phillips-reviews-the-peasants-by-wladyslaw-reymont/)

29. The Peasants – Władysław Reymont \| \#language & literature -
    Culture.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://culture.pl/en/work/the-peasants-wladyslaw-reymont</u>](https://culture.pl/en/work/the-peasants-wladyslaw-reymont)

30. History of Poland - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Poland</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Poland)

31. Władysław Reymont The Peasants - Penguin Books, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://cdn.penguin.co.uk/dam-assets/books/9780241568064/9780241568064-sample.pdf</u>](https://cdn.penguin.co.uk/dam-assets/books/9780241568064/9780241568064-sample.pdf)

32. Symbolizm, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://march.w.staszic.waw.pl/chlopi/jg_symbolizm/</u>](https://march.w.staszic.waw.pl/chlopi/jg_symbolizm/)

33. Chłopi cytaty \| Lubimyczytać.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/cytaty/5084698/ksiazka/chlopi</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/cytaty/5084698/ksiazka/chlopi)

34. The Peasants/Chłopi - Lime Tree Theatre, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://limetreebelltable.ie/events/the-peasants/</u>](https://limetreebelltable.ie/events/the-peasants/)

35. 'The Peasants' Review: A Heart-Breaking Painting Crafted in Rich
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://filmspeak.net/movie-reviews/2023/9/13/the-peasants-review-an-oil-painting-come-to-break-your-heart</u>](https://filmspeak.net/movie-reviews/2023/9/13/the-peasants-review-an-oil-painting-come-to-break-your-heart)

36. Painterly Vision of Władysław Reymont's "The Peasants - Austin
    Polish Film Festival, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.austinpolishfilm.com/news/2024/10/19/painterly-vision-of-wadysaw-reymonts-the-peasants</u>](https://www.austinpolishfilm.com/news/2024/10/19/painterly-vision-of-wadysaw-reymonts-the-peasants)

37. Poland - Medieval, Unification, Partitions \| Britannica, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.britannica.com/place/Poland/History</u>](https://www.britannica.com/place/Poland/History)

38. „Chłopi” – najważniejsze aspekty powieści Władysława Reymonta. -
    Młoda Polska - Bryk.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bryk.pl/wypracowania/jezyk-polski/mloda-polska/5434-chlopi-najwazniejsze-aspekty-powiesci-wladyslawa-reymonta.html</u>](https://www.bryk.pl/wypracowania/jezyk-polski/mloda-polska/5434-chlopi-najwazniejsze-aspekty-powiesci-wladyslawa-reymonta.html)

39. The Peasants Summary - eNotes.com, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.enotes.com/topics/peasants</u>](https://www.enotes.com/topics/peasants)

40. chłopomania - Słownik terminów literackich - Bryk.pl, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bryk.pl/slowniki/slownik-terminow-literackich/68996-chlopomania</u>](https://www.bryk.pl/slowniki/slownik-terminow-literackich/68996-chlopomania)

41. LUDOMANIA - AleKlasa, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://aleklasa.pl/c187-pojeciownik/l-l/ludomania</u>](https://aleklasa.pl/c187-pojeciownik/l-l/ludomania)

42. Chłopomania – Wikipedia, wolna encyklopedia, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ch%C5%82opomania</u>](https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ch%C5%82opomania)

43. The Wedding (1901 play) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wedding\_(1901_play)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wedding_(1901_play))

44. Chłopomania w Weselu – Wesele – Stanisław Wyspiański – poezja ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://poezja.org/wz/interpretacja/5826/Chlopomania_w_Weselu</u>](https://poezja.org/wz/interpretacja/5826/Chlopomania_w_Weselu)

45. Władysław Reymont – Facts - NobelPrize.org, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/literature/1924/reymont/facts/</u>](https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/literature/1924/reymont/facts/)

46. Rękopis „Chłopów” Władysława Reymonta na liście UNESCO - Rynek
    książki, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://rynek-ksiazki.pl/aktualnosci/rekopis-chlopow-wladyslawa-reymonta-na-liscie-unesco/</u>](https://rynek-ksiazki.pl/aktualnosci/rekopis-chlopow-wladyslawa-reymonta-na-liscie-unesco/)

47. Rękopis „Chłopów” Władysława Stanisława Reymonta na liście UNESCO -
    Lubimyczytać, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/aktualnosci/20727/rekopis-chlopow-wladyslawa-stanislawa-reymonta-na-liscie-unesco</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/aktualnosci/20727/rekopis-chlopow-wladyslawa-stanislawa-reymonta-na-liscie-unesco)

48. „Chłopi” Władysława Stanisława Reymonta to jedna z najbardziej zna-
    nych polskich powieści, od lat będąca w kanonie l - ARCHIWUM
    PAŃSTWOWE W WARSZAWIE, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://warszawa.ap.gov.pl/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Plansze-Chlopi-zatwierdzona-wersja-2024-small2.pdf</u>](https://warszawa.ap.gov.pl/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Plansze-Chlopi-zatwierdzona-wersja-2024-small2.pdf)

49. Bedside table \#35. Wojciech Zembaty: In primary school, I had the
    nickname “Reader” - The Polish Book Institute, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://instytutksiazki.pl/en/news,2,bedside-table-35-wojciech-zembaty-in-primary-school-i-had-the-nickname-%E2%80%9Creader%E2%80%9D,4592.html</u>](https://instytutksiazki.pl/en/news,2,bedside-table-35-wojciech-zembaty-in-primary-school-i-had-the-nickname-%E2%80%9Creader%E2%80%9D,4592.html)

50. Are there books everyone in your country has to read in school? :
    r/AskEurope - Reddit, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/AskEurope/comments/o51xgm/are_there_books_everyone_in_your_country_has_to/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskEurope/comments/o51xgm/are_there_books_everyone_in_your_country_has_to/)

51. Matura ustna – zagadnienia z „Chłopów” z omówieniem – pytania ...,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://babaodpolskiego.pl/matura-ustna-chlopi/</u>](https://babaodpolskiego.pl/matura-ustna-chlopi/)

52. matura 2025 - CHŁOPI, Władysław Reymont - OtoUczelnie, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.otouczelnie.pl/news/1451/Chlopi-matura-2025</u>](https://www.otouczelnie.pl/news/1451/Chlopi-matura-2025)

53. Poland introduces “slimmed-down” school curriculum cutting content
    by 20%, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://notesfrompoland.com/2024/07/01/poland-introduces-slimmed-down-school-curriculum-cutting-content-by-20/</u>](https://notesfrompoland.com/2024/07/01/poland-introduces-slimmed-down-school-curriculum-cutting-content-by-20/)

54. Chłopi - Władysław Stanisław Reymont \| Książka w Lubimyczytac.pl
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5084698/chlopi</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5084698/chlopi)

55. Chłopi, Część czwarta - Lato - Władysław Stanisław Reymont \|
    Książka w Lubimyczytac.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5089256/chlopi-czesc-czwarta---lato</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5089256/chlopi-czesc-czwarta---lato)

56. Chłopi. Tom 1 - Władysław Stanisław Reymont \| Książka w
    Lubimyczytac.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5090722/chlopi-tom-1</u>](https://lubimyczytac.pl/ksiazka/5090722/chlopi-tom-1)

57. „Chłopi” – powieść przełamująca tabu \| Portal historyczny
    Histmag.org - historia dla każdego!, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://histmag.org/Chlopi-powiesc-przelamujaca-tabu--26194</u>](https://histmag.org/Chlopi-powiesc-przelamujaca-tabu--26194)

58. Editions of The Peasants: Winter by Władysław Stanisław Reymont,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/work/editions/18114068-ch-opi-zima</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/work/editions/18114068-ch-opi-zima)

59. Reymont, Władyslaw Stanisław, 1867-1925 - The Online Books Page,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/webbin/book/lookupname?key=Reymont%2C%20W%26lstrok%3Badyslaw%20Stanis%26lstrok%3Baw%2C%201867%2D1925</u>](https://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/webbin/book/lookupname?key=Reymont,+W%26lstrok;adyslaw+Stanis%26lstrok;aw,+1867-1925)

60. New Book Release: “The Peasants” by Władysław reymont, translated by
    Anna Zaranko, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://instytutpolski.pl/london/2022/12/29/new-book-release-the-peasantsby-wladyslaw-reymont-translated-by-anna-zaranko/</u>](https://instytutpolski.pl/london/2022/12/29/new-book-release-the-peasantsby-wladyslaw-reymont-translated-by-anna-zaranko/)

61. The many and the feudal \| Morning Star, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://morningstaronline.co.uk/article/c/many-and-feudal</u>](https://morningstaronline.co.uk/article/c/many-and-feudal)

62. Polish writer Reymont's 'The Peasants' published in UK - English
    Section - Polskie Radio, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.polskieradio.pl/395/7791/artykul/3096197,polish-writer-reymonts-the-peasants-published-in-uk</u>](https://www.polskieradio.pl/395/7791/artykul/3096197,polish-writer-reymonts-the-peasants-published-in-uk)

63. Catalog Record: Chłopi; román \| HathiTrust Digital Library,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/011816574</u>](https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/011816574)

64. Ryszard Löw – relentless researcher of Polish Literature. In
    relation to the book: Literackie podsumowania - ejournals,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://ejournals.eu/pliki_artykulu_czasopisma/pelny_tekst/90e101ab-44a2-48be-ad2f-64a2e1691471/pobierz</u>](https://ejournals.eu/pliki_artykulu_czasopisma/pelny_tekst/90e101ab-44a2-48be-ad2f-64a2e1691471/pobierz)

65. Chłopi (TV Series 1972-1973) — The Movie Database (TMDB), otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.themoviedb.org/tv/43599-the-peasants</u>](https://www.themoviedb.org/tv/43599-the-peasants)

66. The Peasants (1973 film) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Peasants\_(1973_film)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Peasants_(1973_film))

67. The Peasants (2023 film) - Wikipedia, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Peasants\_(2023_film)</u>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Peasants_(2023_film))

68. International Spotlight: Chłopi (2023) by DK & Hugh Welchman -
    Exeposé, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://exepose.com/2024/03/15/international-spotlight-chlopi-2023-by-dk-hugh-welchman/</u>](https://exepose.com/2024/03/15/international-spotlight-chlopi-2023-by-dk-hugh-welchman/)

69. “The Peasants” (“Chłopi”) is now playing in selected theaters in the
    ..., otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://pac1944.org/the-peasants-chlopi-is-now-playing-in-selected-theaters-in-the-usa/</u>](https://pac1944.org/the-peasants-chlopi-is-now-playing-in-selected-theaters-in-the-usa/)

70. The Peasants - TIFF, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://tiff.net/events/the-peasants</u>](https://tiff.net/events/the-peasants)

71. The Peasants — DK Welchman & Hugh Welchman - In Review Online,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://inreviewonline.com/2023/12/07/the-peasants/</u>](https://inreviewonline.com/2023/12/07/the-peasants/)

72. The Peasants (2023) - Reviews : r/TIFFReviews - Reddit, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.reddit.com/r/TIFFReviews/comments/16epjk5/the_peasants_2023_reviews/</u>](https://www.reddit.com/r/TIFFReviews/comments/16epjk5/the_peasants_2023_reviews/)

73. The Peasants (Chlopi) Movie Review--Was This An Oscar Contender? -
    YouTube, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Nf7XVSgqXM</u>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Nf7XVSgqXM)

74. The Peasants (Chłopi): Film Review - Loud And Clear Reviews,
    otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://loudandclearreviews.com/the-peasants-chlopi-tiff-film-review/</u>](https://loudandclearreviews.com/the-peasants-chlopi-tiff-film-review/)

75. "THE PEASANTS" - Review - Next Best Picture, otwierano: lipca 25,
    2025,
    [<u>https://nextbestpicture.com/the-peasants/</u>](https://nextbestpicture.com/the-peasants/)

76. Chłopi – klucze maturalne - AleKlasa, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://aleklasa.pl/matura/c266-lektury-klucze-maturalne/chlopi-matura</u>](https://aleklasa.pl/matura/c266-lektury-klucze-maturalne/chlopi-matura)

77. Gratitude, Resilience, and the Strength of Community in The Peasant
    Trilogy \| The Projector, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://kawisniewski.com/2024/11/27/gratitude-resilience-and-the-strength-of-community-in-the-peasant-trilogy/</u>](https://kawisniewski.com/2024/11/27/gratitude-resilience-and-the-strength-of-community-in-the-peasant-trilogy/)

78. Chłopi Quotes by Władysław Stanisław Reymont - Goodreads, otwierano:
    lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/1841912-ch-opi</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/1841912-ch-opi)

79. Quotes by Władysław Stanisław Reymont (Author of Chłopi) -
    Goodreads, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/14047178.W_adys_aw_Stanis_aw_Reymont</u>](https://www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/14047178.W_adys_aw_Stanis_aw_Reymont)

80. File:Chlopi - powiesc wspolczesna. Cz. 1, Jesien 1904 (94123732)
    (cropped).jpg, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Chlopi\_-\_powiesc_wspolczesna.\_Cz.\_1,\_Jesien_1904\_(94123732)\_(cropped).jpg</u>](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Chlopi_-_powiesc_wspolczesna._Cz._1,_Jesien_1904_(94123732)_(cropped).jpg)

81. Obraz wsi, który proponuje literatura Młodej Polski - Młoda Polska -
    Bryk.pl, otwierano: lipca 25, 2025,
    [<u>https://www.bryk.pl/wypracowania/jezyk-polski/mloda-polska/1195-obraz-wsi-ktory-proponuje-literatura-mlodej-polski.html</u>](https://www.bryk.pl/wypracowania/jezyk-polski/mloda-polska/1195-obraz-wsi-ktory-proponuje-literatura-mlodej-polski.html)
